Public-domain English text from Dana C. Munro & George C. Sellery (eds.), Medieval Civilization, 1910, pp. 366-375. Source scan: Internet Archive / California Digital Library.

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
      Adapted from Bibliotheque de l'£cole des Chartes.
              Vol. XXXIII, 1872, pp. 424-442.

   1. To his dear first-born son, Philip, greeting, and his
father's love.
   2. Dear son, since I desire with all my heart that you be
well instructed in all things, it is in my thought to give
you some advice by this writing. For I have heard you
say, several times, that you remember my words better
than those of any one else.
   3. Therefore, dear son, the first thing I advise is that
you fix your whole heart upon God, and love Him with all
your strength, for without this no one can be saved or be
of any worth.
   4. You should, with all your strength, shun everything
which you believe to be displeasing to Him. And you
ought especially to be resolved not to commit mortal sin,
no matter what may happen, and you should permit all
your limbs to be hewn off, and suffer every manner of tor-
        ment, rather than fall knowingly into mortal sin.
    5. If our Lord send you any adversity, whether illness
 or other thing, you should receive it in good patience, and
thank Him for it, and be grateful for it, for you ought to
 believe that He will cause everything to turn out for your



                               366

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
good; and likewise you should think that you have well
merited it, and more also, should He will it, because you
have loved Him but little, and served Him but little, and
have done many things contrary to His will.
   6. If our Lord send you any prosperity, either health
of body or other thing, you ought to thank Him humbly
for it, and you ought to be careful that you are not the
worse for it, either through pride or anything else, for
it is a very great sin to fight against our Lord with His
gifts.
   7. Dear son, I advise you that you accustom yourself
to frequent confession, and that you choose always, as
your confessors, men who are upright and sufficiently
learned, and who can teach you what you should do and
what you should avoid. You should so carry yourself
that your confessors and other friends may dare confi-
        dently to reprove you and show you your faults.
   8. Dear son, I advise you that you listen willingly and
devoutly to the services of Holy Church, and, when you
are in church, avoid frivolity and trifling, and do not
look here and there ; but pray to God with lips and heart
alike, while entertaining sweet thoughts about Him, and
especially at the mass, when the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ are consecrated, and for a little time
before.
   9. Dear son, have a tender and pitiful heart for the
poor, and for all those whom you believe to be in misery
of heart or body, and, according to your ability, comfort
and aid them with some alms.
    10. Maintain the good customs of your realm, and put
 down the bad ones.           Do not oppress your people and do
                                   367

Medieval         Civilization
not burden them with tolls or tailleSj except under very
great necessity.
   11. If you have any unrest of heart, of such a nature
that it may be told, tell it to your confessor, or to some
upright man v^^ho can keep your secret; you will be able
to carry more easily the thought of your heart.
   12. See to it that those of your household are upright
and loyal, and remember the Scripture, which says :
*' Elige viros timentes Deum in quibus sit justicia et qui
oderint avariciam; " that is to say. " Love those who
serve God and who render strict justice and hate covet-
ousness ; " and you will profit, and will govern your king-
       dom well.
   13. Dear son, see to it that all your associates are up-
       right, whether clerics or laymen, and have frequent good
converse with them ; and flee the society of the bad. And
listen willingly to the word of God, both in open and in
secret; and purchase freely prayers and pardons.
   14. Love all good, and hate all evil, in whomsoever it
may be.
   15. Let no one be so bold as to say, in your presence,
words which attract and lead to sin, and do not permit
words of detraction to be spoken of another behind his
back.
   16. Suffer it not that any ill be spoken of God or His
saints in your presence, without taking prompt vengeance.
But if the offender be a clerk or so great a person that
you ought not to try him, report the matter to him who is
entitled to judge it.
   17. Dear son, give thanks to God often for all the good
things He has done for you, so that you may be worthy


                               368

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
to receive more, in such a manner that if it please the
Lord that you come to the burden and honor of govern-
     ing the kingdom, you may be worthy to receive the sacred
imction wherewith the kings of France are consecrated.
   1 8. Dear son, if you come to the throne, strive to have
that which befits a king, that is to say, that in justice and
rectitude you hold yourself steadfaist and loyal toward
your subjects and your vassals, without turning either to
the right or to the left, but always straight, whatever may
happen. And if a poor man have a quarrel with a rich
man, sustain the poor rather than the rich, until the truth
is made clear, and when you know the truth, do justice to
them.
   19. If any one have entered into a suit against you (for
any injury or wrong which he may believe that you have
done to him), be always for him and against yourself in
the presence of your council, without showing that you
think much of your case (until the truth be made known
concerning it) ; for those of your council might be back-
          ward in speaking against you, and this you should not
wish; and command your judges that you be not in any
way upheld more than any others, for thus will your coun-
            cillors judge more boldly according to right and truth.
   20. If you have anything belonging to another, either
of yourself or through your predecessors, if the matter is
certain, give it up without delay, however great it may be,
either in land or money or otherwise. If the matter is
doubtful, have it inquired into by wise men, promptly and
diligently. And if the affair is so obscure that you cannot
know the truth, make such a settlement, by the counsel of
upright men, that your soul, and the souls of your pre-
                                       369

Medieval            Civilization
decessors, may be wholly freed from the affair. And even
if you hear some one say that your predecessors made res-
                 titution, make diligent inquiry to learn if anything re-
        mains to be restored ; and if you find that such is the case,
cause it to be delivered over at once, for the liberation of
your soul and the souls of your predecessors.
   21. You should seek earnestly how your vassals and
your subjects may live in peace and rectitude beneath your
sway; likewise, the good towns and the good cities of
your kingdom. And preserve them in the estate and the
liberty in which your predecessors kept them, and if there
be anything to amend, amend and redress it, and preserve
their favor and their love. For it is by the strength and
the riches of your good cities and your good towns that
the native and the foreigner, especially your peers and
your barons, are deterred from doing ill to you. I well
remember that Paris and the good towns of my kingdom
aided me against the barons, when I was newly crowned.
   22. Honor and love all the people of Holy Church, and
be careful that no violence be done to them, and that their
gifts and alms, which your predecessors have bestowed
upon them, be not taken away or diminished. And I wish
here to tell you what is related concerning King Philip,
my ancestor, as one of his council, who said he heard it,
told it to me. The king, one day, was with his privy
council, and he was there who told me these words. And
one of the king's councillors said to him how much wrong
and loss he suffered from those of Holy Church, in that
they took away his rights and lessened the jurisdiction of
his court ; and they marveled greatly how he endured it.
And the good king answered : " I am quite certain that


                                    370

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
they do me much wrong, but when I consider the good-
       nesses and kindnesses which God has done me, I had
rather that my rights should go, than have a contention
or awaken a quarrel with Holy Church." And this I tell
to you that you may not lightly believe anything against
the people of Holy Church; so love them and honor
them and watch over them that they may in peace do the
service of our Lord.
   23. Moreover, I advise you to love dearly the clergy,
and, so far as you are able, do good to them in their
necessities, and likewise love those by whom God is most
honored and served, and by whom the Faith is preached
and exalted.
   24. Dear son, I advise that you love and reverence your
father and your mother, willingly remember and keep
their commandments, and be inclined to believe their good
counsels.
   25. Love your brothers, and always wish their well-
being and their good advancement, and also be to them
in the place of a father, to instruct them in all good. But
be watchful lest, for the love which you bear to one, you
turn aside from right doing, and do to the others that
which is not meet.
   26. Dear son, I advise you to bestow the benefices of
Holy Church which you have to give, upon good persons,
of good and clean life, and that you bestow them with the
high counsel of upright men. And I am of the opinion
that it is preferable to give them to those who hold no-
       thing of Holy Church, rather than to others. For, if you
inquire diligently, you will find enough of those who have
nothing who will use wisely that entrusted to them.



                               371

Medieval          Civilization
   27. Dear son, I advise you that you try with all your
strength to avoid v^arring against any Christian man, un-
      less he have done you too much ill. And if wrong be
done you, try several ways to see if you can find how you
can secure your rights, before you make war ; and act thus
in order to avoid the sins which are committed in warfare.
   28. And if it fall out that it is needful that you should
make war (either because some one of your vassals has
failed to plead his case in your court, or because he has
done wrong to some church or to some poor person, or
to any other person whatsoever, and is unwilling to make
amends out of regard for you, or for any other reasonable
cause), whatever the reason for which it is necessary for
you to make war, give diligent command that the poor
folk who have done no wrong or crime be protected from
damage to their vines, either through fire or otherwise, for
it were more fitting that you should constrain the wrong-
       doer by taking his own property (either towns or castles,
by force of siege), than that you should devastate the
property of poor people. And be careful not to start the
war before you have good counsel that the cause is most
reasonable, and before you have summoned the offender
to make amends, and have waited as long as you should.
And if he ask mercy, you ought to pardon him, and accept
his amende, so that God may be pleased with you.
   29. Dear son, I advise you to appease wars and conten-
          tions, whether they be yours or those of your subjects,
just as quickly as may be, for it is a thing most pleasing
to our Lord. And Monsignore St. Martin gave us a very
great example of this. For, one time, when our Lord
made it known to him that he was about to die, he set out

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
to make peace between certain clerks of his archbishopric,
and he was of the opinion that in so doing he was giving
a good end to his life.
   30. Seek diHgently, most sweet son, to have good
baillis and good prevots in your land, and inquire fre-
          quently concerning their doings, and how they conduct
themselves, and if they administer justice well, and do no
wrong to any one, nor anything which they ought not do.
Inquire more often concerning those of your household
than of any others, and learn if they be too covetous or
too arrogant; for it is natural that the members should
seek to imitate their chief ; that is, when the master is wise
and well-behaved, all those of his household follow his
example and prefer it. For however much you ought to
hate evil in others, you should have more hatred for the
evil which comes from those who derive their power from
you, than you bear to the evil of others; and the more
ought you to be on your guard and prevent this from hap-
pening.
   31. Dear son, I advise you always to be devoted to the
Church of Rome, and to the sovereign pontiff, our father,
and to bear him the reverence and honor which you owe
to your spiritual father.
   32. Dear son, freely give power to persons of good
character, who know how to use it well, and strive to have
wickednesses expelled from your land, that is to say, nasty
oaths, and everything said or done against God or our
Lady or the saints. In a wise and proper manner put a
stop, in your land, to bodily sins, dicing, taverns, and other
sins. Put down heresy so far as you can, and hold in
especial abhorrence Jews, and all sorts of people who are
                                    373

Medieval Civilization
hostile to the Faith, so that your land may be well purged
of them, in such manner as, by the sage counsel of good
people, may appear to you advisable.
   33. Further the right with all your strength. More-
       over, Iadmonish you that you strive most earnestly to
show your gratitude for the benefits which our Lord has
bestowed upon you, and that you may know how to give
Him thanks therefor.
   34. Dear son, take care that the expenses of your house-
       hold are reasonable and moderate, and that its moneys are
justly obtained. And there is one opinion that I deeply
wish you to entertain, that is to say, that you keep your-
      self free from foolish expenses and evil exactions, and
that your money should be well expended and well ac-
                   quired. And this opinion, together with other opinions
which are suitable and profitable, I pray that our Lord
may teach you.
   35. Finally, most sweet son, I conjure and require you
that, if it please our Lord that I should die before you,
you have my soul succored with masses and orisons, and
that you send through the congregations of the kingdom
of France, and demand their prayers for my soul, and
that you grant me a special and full part in all the good,
deeds which you perform.
   36. In conclusion, dear son, I give you all the blessings
which a good and tender father can give to a son, and I
pray our Lord Jesus Christ, by His mercy, by the
prayers and merits of His blessed Mother, the Virgin
Mary, and of angels and archangels and of all the saints,
to guard and protect you from doing anything con-
          trary to His will, and to give you grace to do it always,
                                            374

Advice of St. Louis to his Son
so that He may be honored and served by you. And
this may He do to me as to you, by His great bounty, so
that after this mortal life we may be able to be together
with Him in the eternal life, and see Him, love Him, and
praise Him without end. Amen. And glory, honor, and
praise be to Him who is one God with the Father and the
Holy Spirit ; without beginning and without end. Amen.




                           375
