Public-domain English edition of St. Francis de Sales, F. Pustet & Co., 1900. Source OCR: Internet Archive.

TO A
DE SALES


THE LIBRARY OF THE

UNIVERSITY OF

NORTH CAROLINA

AT CHAPEL HILL


PRESENTED BY


Estate of Ann A. Zener


UNIVERSITY OF N.C. AT CHAPEL HILL


00024013&


Jntrn&iutton

to


FROM THE FRENCH OF

ST. FRANCIS DE SALES

Bishop and Prince of Geneva


TO WHICH IS PREFIXED

AN ABSTRACT OF HIS LIFE


Jtetertrk $ mUt $c (Ha.

Printers to the Holy Apostolic See and the Sacred Congregation
of Rites

RATISBON, ROME, NEW YORK, CINCINNATI

THE LIBRARY
" THE UNIVERSITY OF NORT1- 1 C AROI IN A =


AT CHAPEL HILL


Printed in U. S. A.


CONTENTS


Abstract of the Life of the Author
A Dedicatory Prayer .
The Author's Preface


Page.

IX
XIII

. xv


Part Jfert.

Chapter.

I. — The description of true devotion .
II. — The propriety and excellency of devotion
in. — Devotion is compatible with every station of life
iv. — Of the necessity of a guide to conduct us in the «vay of

devotion

v. — That we must begin by purifying the soul
vi. — Of the first purgation, which is that of mortal sin

fsi


wen


VII. — Of the second purgation, which is that of affections <
Vin. — Of the means to make this second purgation .
IX. — First meditation. — On our creation .
x. — Second meditation. — On the end for which we

created

xi. — Third meditation. — On the benefits of God
xii. — Fourth meditation. — On sin ....
Xiil. — Fifth meditation. — On death ....
XIV. — Si::th meditation. — On judgment
XV. — Seventh meditation. — On hell ....
Xvi. — Eighth judgment. — On heaven
XVII. — Ninth meditation. — By way of election and choice o

heaven 42

ivin. — Tenth meditation. — By way of election and choice which
the soul makes of a devout life . •


24

26
29
32
35
38
40


45


!▼ CONTENTS.

Chapter. Pass.

xix. --How to make a general confession .... 48
XX. — An authentic protestation, to engrave in the soul the
resolution to serve God and to conclude the acts of

penance 50

XXI. — Inferences drawn from the foregoing protestation . 53
xxii. — That we must purify ourselves from affection to venal

sin 54

xxill. — That we ought to purify ourselves from an affection to

unprofitable amusements 57

txrv. — That we must purge ourselves from our evil inclina-
tions .59


Part Bttovto.


I. — Of the necessity of prayer .»..». 61
fl. — A short method for meditation; and, first, of the
presence of God, which is the first point of prepara-
tion 65

III. — Of invocation the second point of the preparation . 68
IV. — Of the third point of preparation, which consists in
proposing the subject of the mystery on which we
intend to meditate ....... 69

V. — Of considerations, which form the second part of the

meditation 71

VI. — Of affections and resolutions, the third part of medita-
tion 72

vil. — Of the conclusion and spiritual nosegay . . .73
vni. — Certain profitable advices on the subject of meditation, 74
IX. — Of the dryness which we sometimes experience in

meditation 7)

X. — Of the morning exercise 79

XI. — Of the evening exei'cise and the examination of con-
science 81

XII. — Of spiritual recollection . ... 83

XIII. — Of aspirations, ejaculatory prayers, and good thoughts, 8?
xrv. — Of the holy sacrifice of mass, and how we ought to

hear it 93

XV. — Of vespers, and other public exercises .... 96
XVI. — Of the honor and invocation of saints . ... 97


CONTENTS, V

Chapter. Page,

xvii. — How we ought to hear and read the word of God . 99

xviii. — How we ought to receive inspirations .... 101

Xix. — Of holy confession 105

xx. — Of frequent communion ....... 109

XXI. — How we ought to communicate 114


Part GCfrirtJ.

I. — Of the choice we ought to make as to the exercise of

virtues 117

n. — A continuation of the former discourse about the

choice of virtues . . . . . . . 123

m. — Of patience 127

IV. — Of exterior humility 133

V. — Of more internal humility 136

VI. — That humility makes us love our own abjection . . 143
VII. — How we are to preserve our good name in the prac-
tice of humility 147

vni. — Of meekness towards our neighbor, and remedies

against anger 152

IX. — Of meekness towards oui'selves 158

X. — That we must treat our affairs with diligence, but

without eagerness or solicitude ..... 161

XI. — Of obedience 164

XII. — Of the necessity of chastity 167

Xlll= — Advice how to preserve chastity 172

XIV. — Of poverty of spirit to be observed in the midst of

riches 175

XV. — How to practise true and real poverty, being notwith-
standing really rich 179

XVI. — How to practise riches of spirit in real poverty . . 184

xvn. — Of friendship ; first, of that which is evil and frivolous, 186

xvin. — Of fond love 189

Xix. — Of true friendship 194

XX. — Of the ditference between true and vain friendships . 198

XXI. — Advices and remedies against evil friendships . . 201

xxn. — Other advices on friendships 205

xxni. — Of the exercises of exterior mortification . . . 208


VI CONTENTS.

Chapter. Page.

xxiv. — Of conversation and solitude . . . 215

XXV. — Of decency in attire 219

xxvi. — Of discourse; and, first, how we must speak of God . 221
xxvil. — Of modesty in our words, and the respect we owe to

persons 223

xxvin. — Of rash judgment 226

xxix. — Of detraction . , 232

xxx. — Other advices with respect to conversation . . . 239
xxxi. — Of pastimes and recreations ; and, first, of such as are

lawful and commendable 241

xxxn. — Of prohibited games . 243

xxxin. — Of balls and pastimes which are lawful but dangerous, 245
xxxiv. — At what time you may play or dance .... 248
xxxv. — That we must be faithful both on great and small oc-
casions . 249

xxxvi. — That we must keep our mind just and reasonable . 253

xxxvii. — Of desires ... 256

xxxviii. — Instructions for married persons . . 259

xxxix. — Of the sanctity of the marriage bed . . . . 269

XL. — Instructions for widows 274

XLI. — A word to vh-gins .... ... 280


Part ^ourtfj.


I. — That we must disregard the censure of worldlings . 282

II. — That we must always have good courage . . . 286
III. — Of the nature of temptations, and of the difference

between feeling temptation and consenting to it . 28S

iv. — Two good examples on this subject .... 291

v. — An encouragement to a soul in temptation . . . 294

vi. — How temptation and delectation may become sinful . 296

vn. — Remedies against great temptations .... 299

Vlil. — That we must resist small temptations . . . . 301

IX. — What remedies we are to apply to small temptations . 303

x. — How to fortify our hearts against temptations . . 304

xi. — Of inquietude 306

XII. — Of sadness . 310

XIII. — Of spiritual and sensible consolations, and how we

must behave ourselves in them 313


CONTENTS. Vll

Chapter. fAGE.

xiv. — Of spiritual dryne:^ 322

XV. — A remarkable example iu confirmation of the pre-
ceding- remarks 329

Part Jtftfj.

I. — That we ought every year to renew our good resolutions

by the following exercises 334

II. — Considerations on the favor which God does us in calling
us to his service, according to the protestation set down

heretofore 336

in. — Examination of our soul on its advancement in devotion, 339

iv. — An examination of the state of our soul towards God, 341

v. — An examination of our state with regard to ourselves, 344
VI. — An examination of the state of our soul towards our

neighbor . 346

Vll. — An examination of the affections of our soul- . . . 34?

Vlil. — Affections to be performed after this examination . . 348

IX. — Considerations proper to renew our good resolutions, 349

X. — I. Of the excellence of our souls ... . 350

XI. — II. Of the excellence of virtue 351

Xii. — III. On the examples of the saints 353

Xin. — IV. Of the love that Jesus Christ bears us . . 354

XIV. — V. Of the eternal love of God towards us 356
XV. — General affections on the preceding considerations, and

a conclusion of this exercise 357

XVI. — Of the sentiments we must retain after this exercise . 359
xvil. — An answer to two objections which may be made to this

introduction ......... 360

Xviii. — The three last and principal advices for this introduction, 362
Conference between an eminent divine and a poor
beggar, on the means of attaining to Christian per-
fection . . 365


ABSTEACT OF THE LIFE


ST. FRANCIS OF SALES.


FROM THE LESSONS READ OX HIS FESTIVAL IN
THE ROMAN BREVIARY.


ippRANCIS was born of pious and noble parents in
«?« the town of Sales, which gave name to his family.
From his tender years he gave signs of future sanctity,
by his innocence, and the gravity of his manners.
Having in his youth applied himself to the liberal
sciences, he soon after engaged in the stud)7 of phi-
losophy and theology at Paris ; and, that nothing might
be wanting to the cultivation of his mind, he obtained
the degree of Doctor, both in the canon and civil law,
with great applause, in the university of Padua.
During a visit which he made to the holy house of
Loretto he renewed the vow of perpetual chastity,
which he had long before made at Paris, and nevei'
suffered himself to be withdrawn from a resolute
adhesion to this virtue, either by the deceits of wicked
spirits, or the allurements of the senses.

Havino- refused an eminent dignitv, offered him in the
parliament of Savoy, he embraced the clerical state,


X LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF SALES.

and being ordained priest, and made provost of the
church of Geneva, he so perfectly acquitted himself of
every duty of that station, that Granerius, the bishop,
made choice of him to preach the word of God to
the inhabitants of Chablais, and other territories bor-
dering upon Geneva, in order to reclaim them from the
errors of Calvinism. He undertook this mission with
cheerfulness and alacrity, and in the course of it
suffered incredible labors, hardships, calumnies, and
injuries, being often sought for by the heretics, and
in danger of being assassinated by them. But in the
midst of these numberless perils his constancy was
always so firm and inflexible, that, by the assistance of
God, he is said to have reclaimed to the Catholic faith
no less than seventy-two thousand persons, amongst
whom are numbered many illustrious for their nobility
and learning.

After the death of Granerius. who had prevailed
upon him to accept the office of coadjutor, he was
consecrated Bishop. The brilliancy of his sanctity, the
lustre of his zeal for Church discipline, his love of
peace, his compassion for the poor, and all his other
virtues, soon spread themselves abroad on all sides.
For the greater honor and glory of God, he instituted
a new order of religious women, which took its name
from the Visitation of the blessed Virgin, under the
rule of St. Austin ; to which he added his own con-
stitutions, no less admirable for their wisdom than for
their mildness and discretion. He also illustrated the
Church by his writings, replete with heavenly doctrine,
in which he points out a safe and plam way to Christian


LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF SALES. XI

perfection. At length, in the fifty-eighth year of his
age, on his return from France to Annessy, after having
celebrated mass at Lyons, on the festival of St. John
the Evangelist, he was seized with a grievous illness,
and on the following day departed to heaven, in the
year of our Lord 1622. His body was carried to
Annessy, where it was honorably interred in the Church
of the Nuns of the above-mentioned order, and soon
became illustrious for several miracles ; which being
duly proved, he was canonized in the year 1665 by
Pope Alexander VII., who assigned the 29th of January
for his festival.

In the bull of his canonization the following miracles
are recorded to have been, upon the strictest examina-
tion, found incontestable : —

1. Jerome Gemin, who had been drowned, was carried
in his winding-sheet to the grave ; his carcass, by its
stench, denoted that putrefaction had already com-
menced : when suddenly he returned to life, moved his
arms, and raised his voice to publish the praises of
Francis of Sales, who, as he related, had at that very
instant appeared to him in his episcopal habit, with
a mild and glorious countenance. Many other wonder-
ful circumstances greatly added to the lustre of the
miracle.

2. Claudius Marmon, a boy of seven years of age,
who had been blind from his birth, after having per-
formed nine days' prayer, whilst he was lying prostrate
at the feet of the holy prelate, received his sight upon
the spot.

3. Jane Petronilla Evrax, five years old, labored


XII LITE OF ST. FRANCIS OF SALES.

under so inveterate a palsy that no hopes were enter-
tained of her recovery, her hips and legs being quite
withered. At the very hour at which her father was
praying for her, at the tomb of Francis, she was on a
sudden perfectly cured, and, getting up, ran to her
mother.

4. Claudius Julier, aged ten 3-ears, was afflicted in
like manner with a palsy, which he had brought with
him into the world, in so grievous a manner that he
had not the use of either of his hips or of his legs.
Being carried by his mother, for the third time, to kiss
the tomb of Francis of Sales, he received, upon the
spot, strength and vigor in all his joints and limbs,
which were before useless, and in a moment raised
himself up, stood upon his feet, and walked.

5. Frances de la Pesse, who, by falling into a river.,
had been drowned, was restored to life at the tomb,
and b}r the intercession of the holy prelate. All the
marks of deformity which that dreadful accident had
left in her body, together with the livid color and
swelling, were on a sudden wonderfully removed.

6. James Guidi, whose nerves were contracted, amf
who had been an absolute cripple from his birth, im-
ploring the assistance of the prayers of the servant of
God, was in an instant perfectly cured.

7. Charles Materon, who had been a cripple from
his very birth, and strangely deformed in his whole
body, was, by the intercession of the saint, instantly
cured, so that he received upon the spot the perfect
figure of a man, together with the use of his limbs.

All these miracle*- with their respective circum-


PRAYER OF THE AUTHOR. Xni

stances, were proved with the utmost evidence, both ae
to the matters of fact, which were attested by many
credible eye-witnesses, and as to their being clearly
beyond all the power of nature or art ; the more so,
because they were all of them wrought almost instan-
taneously.


A DEDICATORY PRAYER OF THE AUTHOR


O sweet Jesus, my Lord, my Saviour, and my God !
behold me here prostrate before thy Majesty, devoting
and consecrating this work to thy glory ; give life to
its words by thy blessing, that those souls for whom I
have composed it may receive from it the sacred in-
spirations which I desire for them. And particularly
grant them that of imploring for me thy infinite mercy :
to the end that, while I point out to others the way of
devotion in this world, I may not myself be eternally
rejected and confounded in the other ; but that with
them I may forever sing, as a canticle of triumph, the
words which with my whole heart I pronounce, in tes-
timony of my fidelity amidst the hazards of this mortal
life : Live, Jesus! live, Jesus! yea, Lord Jesus! live and
reign in our hearts forever and ever. Amen


THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.


My dear Reader, I pray thee to read this Preface for
our mutual satisfaction.

f^?LYCERA,the nosegay-inaker, knew so well how to
&&M diversify and arrange her flowers, that with the
same flowers she made a great variety of nosegays.
The painter Pausius, in attempting to imitate them,
failed in his design, for he could not diversify his
painting so variously as Glycera did her nosegays. It
is in like manner that the Holy Ghost disposes and
orders, with so much variety, the instructions of de-
motion which he gives us by the tongues and pens of
his servants, that, although the doctrine be the same,
the mode of treating it differs according to the several
methods in which they are composed. I neither can
nor will, nor indeed ought I to write anything in this
Introduction, upon this subject, different from that
which has been already published by our predecessors.
The flowers which I present thee are the same ; but the
nosega}' which I have made of them differs from theirs,
being made up in a different order and method.

Almost all that have hitherto treated of devotion
have had in view the instruction of persons wholly re-
ared from the world ; or have taught a kind of devo-
Son leading: to this absolute retirement ; whereas my

xv


XVI PREFACE.

intention is to instruct such as live in towns, in fami-
lies, or at court, and who, by their condition, are
obliged to lead, as to the exterior, a common life ; who
frequently, under imaginary pretence of impossibility,
will not so much as think of undertaking a devout life :
believing that as no beast dares taste the seed of the
herb Palma Christi, so no man ought to aspire to the
palm of Christian piety as long as he lives in the
bustle of temporal affairs. Now, to such I shall prove
that as the, mother-pearl-fish lives in the sea without
receiving a drop of salt water; and as towards the
Chelidonian islands springs of fresh water may be foun</
in the midst of the sea ; and as the fire-fly passes
through the flames without burning its wings, so a
vigorous and resolute soul may live in the world with-
out being infected by any of its humors, may discover
sweet springs of piety amidst its salt waters, and fly
amongst the flames of earthly concupiscences without
burning the wings of the holy desires of a devout life.
This, it is true, is a difficult task, and, therefore, ]
wish that many would endeavor to accomplish it with
more ardor than has been hitherto done ; and I, weak
as I am, shall endeavor, by this treatise, to contribute
some little assistance to such as, with a generous heart,
shall undertake so worthy an enterprise.

Yet it is not through my own choice, or inclination.,
that this Introduction is now made public. A pious
and virtuous soul, having some time since received of
God the grace of aspiring to a devout life, desired my
particular assistance for that purpose. Being under
many obligations to her, and having long before dis-


PREFACE. XVU

covered in her a warm disposition to piety, I applied
myself very diligently to her instruction ; and having
conducted her through all the exercises suitable to her
desire and condition, I left her certain memorials in
writing, of which she might occasionally make use.
These she afterwards communicated to a learned and
devout religious man ; who, believing that many might
profit bjT their perusal, earnestly requested me to have
them published, to which I readily acquiesced, from a
conviction that his judgment was superior to mine, and
because his friendship had great influence over my will.

That the whole might be more profitable and agree-
able, I have revised and connected the different parts,
adding several advices and instructions which appeared
suited to my intention. Numberless occupations left
me little leisure for the accomplishment of my design .
hence you will find in this treatise neither order nor
method, but merely a collection of good admonitions
which I have delivered in plain and intelligible words,
without bestowing so much as a thought on the orna-
ments of language, having business of more conse
quence to attend to.

I address my discourse to Philothea, because desiring
to reduce what I at first had written for one only, to the
common advantage of man}7 souls ; I make use of a
name applicable to all such as aspire to devotion : for
the Greek word Philothea signifies a soul loving-, or in
love with, God. Regarding, then, throughout this work
a soul which by the desire of devotion aspires to the
love of God, I have divided it into five parts. In the
-first, I endeavor, by remonstrance and exercises, to


XVIII PREFACE.

convert the simple desire of Philothea into an absolute
resolution, which she at last makes, by a firm protesta-
tion, after her general confession, followed by the most
holy communion, in which, giving herself up to her
Saviour, she happily enters into his holy love. In the
second part, to lead her farther on, I show her the two
great means by which she may unite herself more and
more to his divine Majesty, viz., the use of the sacra-
ments, by which our good God comes to us ; and hoi}*
prayer, by which he attracts us to himself. In the
third, I show her how she ought to exercise herself in
the virtues most proper for her advancement ; not stop-
ping, except at some particular advices, which she could
hardly have received elsewhere, or discovered herself.
In the fourth part I expose to her view some of the
snares of her enemies, showing her how she may escape
them, and proceed forward in her laudable under-
taking. In the fifth and last place I make her retire
a little to refresh herself, recover breath, and repair her
strength, that she may afterwards more happily gain
ground, and advance in a devout life.

In this capricious age I foresee that many will say
that it belongs only to members of religious communi-
ties to give particular directions concerning piety, since
they have more leisure than a bishop can have who is
charged with a diocese so heavy as mine is ; that such
an undertaking too much distracts the understanding,
which should be employed in affairs of importance.
But I tell thee, dear reader, with the great St. Denys,
that it belongs principally to bishops to conduct souls
to perfection, since then- order is as supreme among


PREFACE. XIX

men as that of the seraphim is <imong the angels, so
that their leisure cannot be better employed. The
ancient bishops and fatheis of the church, it must be
granted, were at least as careful of their charge as we
are ; yet the}7 declined not to superintend the particular
conduct of several souls who had recourse to their assist-
ance, as we see by their epistles, in which instance
they imitated the apostles, who, amidst the general
harvest of the world, picked up certain remarkable ears
of corn with a special and particular affection. Who is
ignorant that Timothy, Titus, Philemon, Onesimus, St.
Thecla, and Appia, were the dear disciples of the great
St. Paul, as St. Mark and St. Petronilla were of St.
Peter, — St. Petronilla, I say, who, as Baronius and
Galonius learnedly prove, was not St. Peter's carnal,
but only his spiritual, daughter ? And does not St. John
write one of his canonical epistles to the devout Lady
Electa ?

It is painful, I confess, to direct souls in particular ;
but it is a pain that gives a comfort like that which is
felt b}T the laborers in the harvest and vintage, wdio are
never better pleased than when they have most to do,
and when their burdens are the heaviest. It is a labor
which refreshes and revives the heart by the sweet
delight it excites in those who are engaged in it ; as the
cinnamon refreshes those who carry it through Arabia
Felix. It is said that when the tigress finds one of her
whelps, which the huntsman leaves in the way to amuse
her, whilst he carries off the rest of the litter, she loads
herself with it, and yet feels not herself encumbered ;
but, on the contrary, more active in the course which site


XX PREFACE.

takes to secure it in her den ; natural love diminishing
the weight of her burden. How much more willingly,
then, will a fatherly heart take charge of a soul in which
he has found a desire of holy perfection ; carrying it in
his bosom as a mother does her little child, without
being wearied by so precious a burden ! But this must
be, indeed, a fatherly heart ; and therefore the apostles
and apostolic men call their disciples not only their
children, but, still more tenderly, their little children.

It is true, dear reader, that I here write of a devout
life, without being myself devout, yet certainly not
without a desire of becoming so ; and it is this affection
towards devotion which encourages me to instruct thee.
For, as a great and learned man has said, " to stud}',
is a good way to learn ; to hear, is a still better ; but to
teach, is the best of all."—" It often happens," said St.
Austin, writing to his devout Florentina, " that the
office of distributing gives us the merit of receiving ;
and that the office of teaching serves as a foundation
for learning."

Alexander caused the picture of his fair Campaspe
to be drawn by the hand of the celebrated Apelles ; as
the painter was obliged to look upon her for a consid-
erable time together, as fast as he drew her features in
his picture the love of them became insensibly imprinted
in his heart. The circumstance coming to the knowledge
of Alexander, taking pity on Apelles, he gave her to
him in marriage, depriving himself, for his sake, of
the woman whom he loved most in the world, in which
action, says Pliny, he showed the greatness of his
mind as much as he could have done by the most


PREFACE. XXI

signal victory. Now I am of opinion, beloved reader,
that it is the will of God, that I, being a bishop, should
paint upon the hearts of his people, not only common
virtues, but also his most dear and well-beloved devo-
tion. And I willingly undertake the office, as well in
obedience to him, and to discharge my duty, as with
the hope that, by engraving her in the minds of others,
nry own may become enamored with her beauty Xow,
if ever this divine Majesty shall see me passionately
in love with her, he will give her to me in an eternal
marriage. The fair and chaste Rebecca, watering
Isaac's camels, was destined to be his wife, and re-
ceived, on his part, golden ear-rings and bracelets.
Thus do I flatter nryself, through the infinite goodness
of God. that whilst I conduct his dear sheep to the
wholesome waters of devotion, he will make my soul
his spouse, putting in my ears the golden words of his
holy love ; and on my arms, strength to practise good
works, in which consists the essence of true devotion ;
which I humbly beseech his divine Majesty to grant to
me, and all the children of his Church, to which I
forever submit my writings, my actions, my words, my
thoughts and inclinations.

At Axnessy, the Feast of St. M. Magdalen, 1609.


INTRODUCTION

T O

A DEVOUT LIFE


Part JFtrgt*


CONTAINING INSTRUCTIONS AND EXERCISES FOR CONDUCE

ING THE SOUL FROM HER FIRST DESIRE TILL SHE

BE BROUGHT TO A FULL RESOLUTION TO

EMBRACE A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER I.

THE DESCRIPTION OF TRUE DEVOTION.

^y^OU aspire to devotion, my dearest Philothea.
^A^. because, being a Christian, you know it to
be a virtue extremely pleasing to the Divine
Majesty. But since small faults, committed in
the beginning of any undertaking, grow in the
progress infinitely greater, and become in the end
almost irreparable, you must first know what the
virtue of devotion is ; for since there is but one
true devotion, and many which are false and
deceitful, if you cannot distinguish that which is
true, you may easily deceive and amuse yourself
in following some fantastical and superstitious
devotion.


Z A DEVOUT LIFE.

As Aurelius painted all the faces of his pictures
to the air and resemblance of the woman he loved,
so every one paints devotion according to his own
passion and fancy. He that is addicted to fasting
thinks himself very devout if he fasts, though his
heart be at the same time filled with rancor, and
scrupling to moisten his tongue with wine, or even
with water, through sobriety, he makes no diffi-
culty to drink deep of his neighbor's blood, by
detraction and calumny. Another considers him-
self devout because he recites daily a multiplicity
of prayers, though immediately afterwards he
utters the most disagreeable, arrogant, and injuri-
ous words amongst his domestics and neighbors.
Another cheerfully draws an alms out of his purse
to relieve the poor, but cannot draw meekness out
of his heart to forgive his enemies. Another
readily forgives enemies, but never satisfies his
creditors but by constraint. These, by some,
are esteemed devout, while, in reality, they are
by no means so.

As Saul's servants sought David in his house,
but Michol, laying a statue in his bed, and cover-
ing it with his clothes, made them believe it was
David himself, so many persons, by covering
themselves with certain external actions belonging
to devotion, make the world believe that they are
truly devout, whereas they are in reality nothing
but statues and phantoms of devotion.

True devotion, Philothea, presupposes, not a
partial, but a thorough love of God. For inas-
much as divine love adorns the soul, it is called
grace, making us pleasing to the Divine Majesty;


DESCRIPTION OF TRUE DEVOTION". O

inasmuch as it gives us the strength to do good,
it is called charity ; but when it is arrived at that
degree of perfection by which it not only makes
us do well, but also work diligently, frequently,
and readily, then it is called devotion.

As ostriches never fly, as hens fly low, heavily,
and but seldom, and as eagles, doves, and swal-
lows fly aloft, swiftly and frequently, so sinners
fly not at all towards God, but lie, grovelling on
earth, with only earthly objects in view. Good
people, who have not as yet attained to devotion,
fly towards God by their good works, but rarely
slowly and heavily ; but devout souls ascend to
Him by more frequent, prompt, and lofty flights.
In short, devotion is nothing else but that spirit-
ual agility and vivacity by which charity works
in us, or we work by her, with alacrity and affec-
tion ; and as it is the business of charity to make
us observe all God's commandments, generally
and without exception, so it is the part of devo-
tion to make us observe them more fully and with
diligence. Wherefore he who observes not all
the commandments of God cannot be esteemed
either good or devout ; since to be good he must
be possessed of charity ; and to be devout, besides
charity, he must show a cheerfulness and alacrity
in the performance of charitable actions.

As devotion, then, consists in a certain excellent
degree of charity, it makes us not only active and
diligent in the observance of God's command-
ments, but it also excites us to the performance
of every good work with an affectionate alacrity,
though it be not of precepts, but only of counsel.


* A DEVOUT LIFE.

For as a man newly recovered from any infirmity
walks as much as is necessary for him, but yet

slowly and at his leisure, so a sinner, just healed
of his iniquity, walks as far as God commands
him, yet slowly and heavily, till such time as he
attains to devotion ; for then, like a man in sound
health, he not only walks, but runs, and springs
forward in the way of God's commandments ; and.
moreover, advances with rapidity in the paths of
his heavenly counsels and inspiration.

To conclude : charity and devotion differ no
more from each other than fire does from flame ;
for charity is a spiritual fire, which, when inflamed,
is called devoton. Hence it appears that devotion
adds nothing to the fire of charity but the flame,
which makes it ready, active, and diligent, not
only in the observance of the commandments of
God, but also in the execution of his heavenly
counsels and inspirations.


CHAPTER II.

THE PROPRIETY AND EXCELLENCY OF DEVOTION.

HEY who discouraged the Israelites from
*° going into the land of promise told them it
was a country which devoured its inhabitants ; or,
in other words, that it was impossible to withstand
the pestilential infection of its air ; and, further,
tnat the natives were such monsters that they


EXCELLENCY OF DEVOTION. 5

devoured men like locusts. It is in this manner,
my dear Philothea, that the world defames holy
devotion, representing devout persons as a peevish,
gloomy, and sullen race of men, pretending that
devotion begets melancholy and insupportable
humors. But as Josue and Caleb protested that
the promised land was not only good and fair, but
also that the possession of it would be sweet and
agreeable, so the Holy Ghost, by the mouths of
all the saints, and our Saviour by his own, assure
us that a devout life is a life of all others the most
sweet, happy, and amiable.

The world beholds devout people to fast, pray,
suffer injuries, serve the sick, and give alms to
the poor; it sees them watch over themselves, re-
strain their anger, stifle their passions, deprive
themselves of sensual pleasures, and perform other
actions in themselves painful and rigorous ; but
the world discerns not the inward cordial devotion
which renders all these actions agreeable, sweet,
and easy. Look at the bees : they find upon the
thyme a very bitter juice, yet, in sucking it, they
convert it into honey, because such is their prop-
erty. O worldlings ! devout souls, it is true, find
much bitterness in their exercises of mortification ;
but in performing them they convert them into
the most delicious sweetness. The fires, flames,
wheels, and swords, seemed flowers and perfumes
to the martyrs, because they were devout. If,
then, devotion can confer a sweetness on the most
cruel torments, and even on death itself, what can
it not do for virtuous actions? Sugar sweetens
green fruits, and corrects whatever crudity or un-


b A DEVOUT LIF5.

wholesomeness may be in those that are ripe.
Now, devotion is that true spiritual sugar which
corrects the bitterness of mortification by the
sweetness of its consolations ; it removes dis-
content from the poor ; solicitude from the rich ;
sadness from the oppressed ; insolence from the
exalted ; melancholy from the solitary, and dissipa-
tion from him that is in company. It serves as
well for fire in winter as for dew in summer. It
knows as well how to use abundance as how to
suffer want, and how to render honor and con-
tempt equally profitable. In a word, it entertains
pleasure and pain with equanimity, and replenishes
the soul with an admirable sweetness.

Contemplate Jacob's ladder, for in it you have a
true picture of a devout life. The two parallel
sides between which we ascend, and in which the
rounds are fixed, represent prayer, which obtains
the love of God, and the sacraments which confer
it. The rounds are the several degrees of charity
by which we advance from virtue to virtue, either
descending by action to the help and support of
our neighbor, or ascending by contemplation to an
amorous union with God. Now, look attentively,
I beseech you, upon those who are on this ladder :
they are either men who have angelical hearts, or
angels clothed in human bodies. They are not
young, although they seem so, because they are
full of vigor and spiritual activity. They have
wings to soar up to God by holy prayer ; but
they have also feet to walk with men by a holy
and edifying conversation. Their countenances
are fair and cheerful, because they receive all


DEVOTION COMPATIBLE AVITH EVERY STATION.


things with sweetness and content. Their legs,
their arms, and heads are bare, because in all their
thoughts, affections, and actions they have no
other design or motive than that of pleasing God.
The rest of their body has no other covering than
& fair and light robe, to show that, although they
make use of the world and worldly things, vet
they use them in a most pure and moderate man-
ner, not taking more of them than is necessary for
their condition. Such are devout persons. Be-
lieve me, clear Philothea, devotion is the quintes-
sence of pleasures, the queen of virtues, and the
perfection of charity. If charity be milk, devotion
is the cream ; if charity be a plant, devotion is its
flower ; if charity be a precious stone, devotion is
its lustre ; if charity be a rich balm, devotion is its,
odor ; yea, the odor of sweetness, which comforts
men and rejoices angels.


CHAPTER III.

DEVOTION IS COMPATIBLE WITH EVERY STATION OF LIFE.

^JfS in the creation, God commanded the plants
^k to bring forth their fruits, each one according
to its kind, so he commands all Christians, who
are the living plants of his Church, to bring forth
the fruits of devotion, each according to his quality
and vocation. Devotion ought, then, to be not only
differently exercised by the gentleman, the trades-


8 A DEVOUT LITE.

man, the servant, the prince, the widow, the maid,
and the married woman, but its practice should be
also adapted to the strength, the employments, and
obligations of each one in particular. For I ask
thee, Philothea, is it fit that a bishop should lead
the solitary life of a Carthusian? or that married
people should lay up no greater store than the
Capuchin ? If a tradesman were to remain the
whole day in the church, like the religious, or
were the religious man continually exposed to
encounter difficulties in the service of his neigh-
bor, as the bishop is, would not such devotion be
ridiculous, preposterous, and insupportable? This
fault is, nevertheless, very common, and hence the
world, which distinguishes not between real devo-
tion and the indiscretion of those who imagine
themselves to be devout, murmurs at the devotion
which cannot prevent these disorders.

No, Philothea, true devotion does no harm
whatever, but rather gives perfection to all things ;
but when it is not compatible with our lawful
vocation, then, without doubt, it is false. "The
bee," says Aristotle, "extracts honey from flowers
without injuring them, and leaves them as entire
and fresh as she found them." True devotion goes
still further, for it not only does no injury to any
vocation or employment, but, on the contrary,
adorns and beautifies it. As all sorts of precious
stones, when cast into honey, receive a greater
lustre, each according to its color, so every one's
vocation becomes more agreeable when united
with devotion. By devotion, the care of the
family is rendered more peaceable, the love of


DEVOTION COMPATIBLE WITH EVERY STATION. 9

the husband and wife more sincere ; the service of
the prince more faithful ; and every employment
more pleasant and agreeable.

It is ar srror, or rather a heresy, to say that
devotion is incompatible with the life of a soldier,
a tradesman, a prince, or a married woman. It is
true, Philothea, that a devotion purely contem-
plative, monastical, and religious, cannot be exer-
cised in those vocations ; but, besides these three
kinds of devotion, there are several others proper
to conduct to perfection those who live in the secular
state. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, David, Job,
Tobias, Sarah, Rebecca, and Judith, bear witness
Of this in the Old Testament ; and in the New, St.
Joseph, Lydia, and St. Crispin, practised perfect
devotion in their shops ; St. Ann, St. Martha, St.
Monica, Aquila, Priscilla, in their families ; Cor-
nelius, St. Sebastian, St. Maurice, in the army;
Constantine, Helena, St Lewis, blessed Amedseus,
and St. Edward, on the throne. Nay, it has hap-
pened that many have lost perfection in the desert
who had preserved it in the world, which seems
so little favorable to perfection. "Lot,"' says St.
Gregory, " who was so chaste in the city, defiled
himself in the wilderness.'' Wheresoever, then, we
are, we may, and should, aspire to a perfect life.


10 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER IV.

OF THE NECESSITY OF A GUIDE TO CONDUCT US IN THE WAY OF
DEVOTION.

^Q^OUNG Tobias, being commanded to go to
^*&- Rages, answered, "I know not the way." " Go
then," replied his father, "and seek some man to
conduct thee." I say the same to thee, my Philo-
thea. Wouldst thou walk in earnest towards de-
votion, seek some good man, who may guide and
conduct thee ; this is the best advice I can give thee.
"Though you search for the will of God," says
the devout Avila, "you shall never so assuredly
find it as in the way of humble obedience, so
much recommended and practised by all holy per-
sons who have aspired to devotion." St. Teresa,
seeing the lady Catharine, of Cardona, perform
such rigorous penances, desired anxiously to imi-
tate her, contrary to the advice of her confessor.
The saint was much tempted to disobey him in that
particular ; but God said to her : " Daughter, thou
art in a good and secure wa}r ; seest thou her pen-
ance? But I value more thy obedience." Hence
she conceived so high an esteem for this virtue
that, besides that which she owed to her superiors,
she vowed a particular obedience to an excellent
man, to whose direction and advice she implicitly
submitted. In return for this obedience she, as
well as many other devout souls before and after
her, who, that they might more entirely subject
themselves to God, submitted their wills to that


GUIDE TO DEVOTION. 11

of his servants, enjoyed most unspeakable conso-
lations. St. Catharine, of Sienna, in her dialogues,
highly applauds this implicit obedience. The
devout princess, St. Elizabeth, submitted herself
with an entire obedience to the learned Conradus ;
and the advice given by the great St. Lewis to his
son, a little before his death, was, " Confess often ;
choose a good confessor, a wise man, who may
safely teach thee to do the things that shall be
necessary for thee."

" A faithful friend," says the Holy Scripture, " is
a strong defence ; and he that hath found him hath
found a treasure. A faithful friend is the medi-
cine of life and immortality ; and they that fear
the Lord shall find him." — Eccli., vi., 14., 16.
These divine words, as you may easily perceive,
refer to a happy immortality, for the attainment
of which it is necessary that we should .submit
ourselves to the direction of a faithful friend, who,
by the prudence and wisdom of his counsels, may
guide us in all our actions, and secure us from the
ambushes and deceits ot the wicked one. Such a
friend will be to us as a treasure of wisdom and con-
solation, in all our afflictions, our sorrows, and
relapses ; he will serve- as a medicine to cure, and
as a cordial to comfort our hearts in our spiritual
disorders; he will guard us from evil, and make
us advance in good ; and should any infirmity be-
fall us, he will assist in our recovery, and prevent
its being unto death.

But who shall find this friend? They that fear
the Lord, answers the wise man ; that is, the
humble, who earnestly desire their spiritual ad-


12 A DEVOUT Lin..

vancement. Since, then, it concerns }^ou so much
Philothea, to travel with a good guide in this holy
road lo devotion, beseech God, with the greatest
importunity, to furnish you with one who may be
according to his own heart ; and be assured that
he will rather send you an angel from heaven, as
he did to young Tobias, than fail to grant your
request.

Now, such a guide, when you have found him,
ought always to be an angel to you ; consider him
not as a mere man ; place not your confidence in
his human learning, but in God, whose minister
he is, and who speaks to you by his means, put-
ting in his heart and in his mouth whatever shall
be requisite for your happiness, so that you ought
to pay as much attention to him as to an angel who
would come down from heaven to conduct you
thither. Open your heart to him with all sincerity
and fidelity, manifesting clearly and explicit \y the
state of your conscience without fiction or dissimu-
lation ; by this means your good actions will be
examined and approved ; and your evil ones cor-
rected and remedied ; you will be comforted and
strengthened in your afflictions, and be kept regu-
larly in order in your consolations. Place great
confidence in him, but let it be united with a holy
reverence, so that the reverence may not diminish
the confidence, nor the confidence the reverence.
Confide in him with the respect of a daughter to-
wards her father ; respect him with the confidence
of a son towards his mother. In a word, your
friendship for him ought to be strong and sweet,
pure and holy, entirely spiritual and divine.


NECESSITY OF PURIFYING THE SOUL. 13

"For this end, choose one amongst a thousand,'*
says Avila ; but I say, choose one amongst ten
thousand ; for there are fewer than can be imagined
who are capable of this office. He must be a man
of charity, learning, and prudence. If any one of
these three qualities be wanting in him, there is
danger ; but I say to you again, Ask him of God,
and having obtained him, bless his Divine Majesty,
remain constant, and seek no other ; but proceed
on, with sincerity, humility, and confidence, till
you arrive at the happy end of your journey.


CHAPTER V.

THAT WE MUST BEGIN BY PURIFYING THE SOUL.

f HE flowers have appeared in our land, the time
of pruning is come." — Cantic. ii. 12. What
else are the flowers of our hearts, O Philothea ! but
good desires? Xow, as soon as they appear we
must put our hand to the pruning-knife, to re-
trench from our conscience all dead and superfluous
works. As the alien maid, before she could marry
an Israelite, was obliged to put off the garment of
her captivity, pare her nails, and shave her hair,
so the soul that aspires to the honor of being
spouse to the Son of God must divest herself of
the old man, and clothe herself with the new, by
forsaking sin, and removing every obstacle which
may prevent her union with God. To enjoy a


14 A DEVOUT LIFE.

good state of health, it is necessary that we be
previously purged from offensive humors. St. Paul,
in a moment, was cleansed with a perfect purgation ;
so was St. Catherine, of Genoa, St. Mary Magdalen,
St. Pelalia, and some others ; but this kind of
purgation is as miraculous and extraordinary in
the order of grace as the resurrection of the dead
is in that of nature ; and therefore to expect it
would be presumptuous. The ordinary purification,
or healing, whether of the body or the mind, is
not instantaneously effected, but takes place grad-
ually, by passing from one degree to another, with
labor and patience.

The angels upon Jacob's ladder had wings, yet
they flew not, but ascended and descended in order
from one step to another. The soul that rises
from sin to devotion may be compared to the
dawning of the day, which at its approach expels
not the darkness instantaneously, but by little and
little. "The cure," says the medical aphorism,
w which is made leisurely, is always the most per-
fect." The diseases of the heart, as well as those of
the body, oome posting on horseback, but depart
leisurely on foot. Courage and patience then,
Philothea, are necessary in this enterprise. Alas !
how much are those souls to be pitied who, per-
ceiving themselves subject to many imperfections,
after having for a While exercised themselves in
devotion, begin to be dissatisfied, troubled, and
discouraged, and suffer their hearts to be almost
overcome with the temptation of forsaking all,
and returning back to their former course of life.
But, ou the other hand, are not those souls also in


NECESSITY OF PURIFYING THE SOUL. 15

extreme danger, who, by a contrary temptation,
believe themselves quite purified from their im-
perfections the first day of their purgation ; who
think themselves perfect, though as yet scarcely
formed, and presume to fly without wings ! O
Philothea ! in what danger are they of relapsing,
being so soon out of the physician's hands ? " It is
rain for you to rise before light " says the prophet
(Ps. cxxvi, 2) ; "rise after you have sitten," and
he himself practised this lesson ; for having been
already washed and cleansed, he desires to be
washed and cleansed still more and more. — Ps. i. 3.
The exercise of purifying the soul neither can
nor ought to end but with our life ; let us not
then be disturbed at the sight of our imperfec-
tions, for perfection consists in fighting against
them ; and how can we fight against them without
seeing them, or overcome them without encoun-
tering them? Our victory consists not in being
insensible to them, but in refusing them our con-
sent ; now to be displeased with them, is not to
consent to them. It is absolutely necessary foi
the exercise of our humility that we should some-
times meet with wounds in this spiritual warfare ;
but then we are never overcome, unless we eithei
lose our life or our courage. Xow, imperfections
or venial sins cannot deprive us of our spiritual
life, wrhich is not lost, but by mortal sin. It then
only remains that we lose not our courage. "Save
me, O Lord ! " said David, "from pusillanimity of
spirit, or cowardice and faint -heartedness." It is
happy for us that in this warfare we shall always
be victorious, provided we do but fight.


16 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER VI.

OF THE FIRST PURGATION, WHICH IS THAT OF MORTAL SIN

JJ^HE first purgation that must be made is that
d^p of mortal sin; the means to make it is the
holy sacrament of penance. Seek , in the first place,
the best confessor you can find ; then procure some
of those books which have been composed for as-
sisting sinners to make a good confession ; such as
Granada, Bruno, Arias, or Auger; read them
carefully, and remark, from point to point, in
what you have offended from the time you came
to the use of reason to the present hour. Should
you distrust your memory, write down what you
have observed, and having thus prepared and col-
lected together the bad humors of your conscience,
detest and renounce them with the greatest con-
trition and sorrow that your heart can conceive,
considering these four things, (1) that by sin you
have lost the grace of God ; (2) that you have re-
signed your claim to heaven; (3) that you have
chosen the eternal pains of hell ; and (4) that you
have renounced the eternal love of God. You
see, Philothea, that I speak of a general confes-
sion of the whole life, Avhieh, though not ab-
solutely necessary, yet I look upon as exceedingly
profitable in the beginning, and, therefore, earnestly
advise it. It frequently happens that the ordinary
confessions of those who lead a common worldly
life are full of considerable defects ; for they
often make littlo or no preparation, neither have


ON THE SECOND PURGATION. 17

they sufficient contrition ; nay, it too frequently
happens that they go to confession with a tacit
inclination of returning to sin, which appears
from their subsequent unwillingness to avoid the
occasions of sin, and to make use of the means
necessary for the amendment of their life. In
all these cases, a general confession calls us to
the knowledge of ourselves: it excites in us a
wholesome confusion for our past life ; it makes
us admire the mercy of God, who has so patiently
waited for us ; it appeases our hearts ; composes
our minds ; excites us to good resolutions ; gives
occasion to our spiritual father to prescribe us
advices more suitable to our condition, and opens
our heart to declare ourselves with more confi-
dence in our following confessions. Speaking,
then, of a general renovation of your heart, and of
an universal conversion of your soul to God, by
undertaking a devout life, it appeal's necessary.
Philothea, to exhort you to this general confes-
sion.


CHAPTER VII.

OF THF SECOND PURGATION, WHICH IS TH'~ OF AFFECTION TO SlN.i

^pLTHOUGH all the Israelites departed in
^^ effect out of the land of Egypt, yet they did
not all depart in affection ; wherefore many of

aTo understand better the sentiments of the Saint, in this chapter,
with regard to the affections to sin, at which some have taken offence-


18 A DEVOUT LIFE.

them regretted in the wilderness their want of the
onions and flesh-pots of Egypt. In like manner,
there are penitents who in effect depart from
sin, but yet quit it not in affection; they propose
to sin no more, but it is with a certain reluctancy
of heart that they deprive themselves of, or
abstain from, an unhappy delectation in sin. Al-
though they renounce and avoid it, they never-
theless often look back upon it, as Lot's wife did
towards Sodom. They abstain from sin, as sick
men do from melons y which they forbear to
taste, because the physician threatens them with
death if they eat them ; but it is with the utmost
reluctance that they refrain from them. They
talk of them incessantly, and are unwilling to
believe them hurtful. They have a continual
longing for them, and think those happy who may
eat them. Such is the case with loose and weak
penitents ; they abstain for some time from sin,
but it is with the utmost regret ; they would re-
joice if they could sin, and not bb damned ; they
speak of it with a certain pleasure and relish, and
think those who sin more at ease. The man who
was resolved to be revenged on anocher changes
his mind in confession; but shortly after you

we must distinguish two different acceptations of these words. For if,
by affection to sin. we understand the wilful love, 01 desire of sin, or
a" voluntary complacency, or delight in the thought of committing sin,
it is certain that in this sense an affection to mortal sin is in itself a
mortal sin. But the holy prelate does not take the affection to sin in
this sense. He only means by the affection to sin, a certain propensity
and inclination to sin, contracted by a former evil habit, which is apt
to remain hi the soul, as a relic of the old leaven, after her conversion
to God, and her reconciliation in the sacrament of penance, which,
though upon reflection the soul resists it, is, nevertheless, of a very
dangerous nature, if not diligently purged away, according to the sen-
timents which the Saint here inculcates.


ON THE SECOND PURGATION. 19

may find him among his friends, talking with
pleasure to them of his quarrel, and saying,
"Had it not been for the fear of God, and that the
divine law in this article of forgiving is hard, —
would to God it were allowed to revenge one's
self! " Ah ! who does not see, that although he be
delivered from the sin, he is still entangled by an
affection to it ; and that, being in effect out of
Egypt, he is still there in affection, longing after
its garlic and onions ; as a woman, who having
detested her impure love, is, nevertheless, pleased
with being courted and followed ! Alas, in how
great danger are all such people !

If you desire, O Philothea ! to undertake a
devout life, you must not only cease to sin, but
also cleanse your heart from all affections to sin ;
for, besides the danger of a relapse, these wretched
affections will so perpetually weaken and depress
your spirits, that they will render you incapable
of practising good works with alacrity and dili-
gence, in which, nevertheless, consists the very
essence of devotion. Souls that are recovered
from the ^ .ate of sin, and still retain these affec-
tions, are, in my opinion, like minds in the green-
sickness : though not sick, yet all their actions are
sick ; they eat without relish, sleep without rest,
laugh without joy, and rather drag themselves
alono; than walk. This is exactly the case with
those here described : they do good, but with such
a spiritual heaviness that it takes away all the
grace from their good exercises, which are few in
number and small in effect.


20 A DEVOUT LIFE.

V

CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE MEANS TO MAKE THIS SECOND PURGATION.


S^^' ^ie nis^ means5 nay» the very f<
ML of this second purgation is a lively


foundation,
sense and

strong apprehension of the dreadful evils in which
sin involves the soul, by means of which we con-
ceive a deep and vehement contrition. For as
contrition, be it ever so small, when joined with
the virtue of the sacrament, cleanses us sufficiently
from sin, so when it is great and vehement, it
cleanses us even from every affection to sin. A
slight hatred or rancor creates an aversion to the
person whom we hate, and makes us avoid his
company ; but if it be a rooted and violent hatred,
we not only fly and abhor him, but even loathe the
conversation of his kindred and friends, and can-
not endure so much as the sight of his picture,
nor of anything that belongs to him. In like
manner, when a penitent hates sin only with a
weak, though true contrition, he forms the resolu-
tion to sin no more ; but when he hates it with a
rooted and A^igorous contrition, he not only detests
the sin, but also the affections, connections, and
occasions which lead towards it. AVe must, then,
Philothea, enlarge our contrition as much as pos-
sible ; we must extend it to everything that has
the least relation to sin. Thus Magdalen, in her
conversion, lost so effectually the taste of the
pleasure she had taken in her sins as never to
think of them more. And David protested, not


ON OUR CREATION. 21

only his abhorrence of sin, but also of all the ways
and paths that lead to it. - — Ps. xxviii. 104. In
this point consists the soul's growing young again,
which he beautifully compares to the renewing of
the eagle. — Ps. vii. 5.

Now, in order to obtain this perfect contrition
you must diligently exercise yourself in the fol-
lowing meditations, which, by the help of God's
grace, will eradicate from your heart both sin 2nd
the affection to sin. As it is for this purpose I
have composed them, use them in the order I
have placed them, taking but one for each day,
and that, if possible, in the morning, which is the
best time for spiritual exercises ; and endeavor to
ruminate on them during the rest of the day. But
if you be not as yet accustomed to meditation, read
what shall be said on this subject in the Second
Part.

CHAPTER IX.

THE FIRST MEDITATION. —ON OUR CRFATION.
PREPARATION.

SOLACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
•its? Beseech him to inspire you.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Consider that so many years ago you were
not yet in the world, and that your being was a
mere nothing. Where were we, O my soul ! at


22 A DEVOUT LIFE.

that time? The world had then lasted sc long,
and we were not known.

2. God has drawn you out of this nothing, to
make you what you now are, merely out of his
own pure goodness, having no need of you what-
ever.

3. Consider the being that God has given you ;
it is the greatest in this visible world, capable of
eternal life, and of being perfectly united to his
Divine Majesty.

AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Humble yourself profoundly before God,
saying from your heart, with the Psalmist, K O
Lord ! my whole being is as nothing before thee,
and how hadst thou remembrance of me to create
me?" Alas, my soul! thou wast ingulfed in
that ancient nothing, and hadst yet been therein
had not God drawn thee thence ; and what couldst
thou have done hadst thou remained in such a
state ?

2. Return thanks to God. O my great and
good Creator ! how much am I obliged to thee,
since thou hast vouchsafed to draw me out of
nothing, and by thy mercy to make me what I am?
What can I ever do to bless thy holy name as I
ought, and to render due thanks to thy inestimable
goodness ?

3. Confound yourself. But, alas ! my Creator,
nstead of uniting myself to thee by loving and

serving thee I have made myself a rebel by my
disorderly affections, separating myself, and stray
ing far away from thee to unite myself to sin,


ON OUR CREATION. 23

valuing thy goodness no more than if thou hadst
not been my Creator.

4. Cast yourself down before God. 0 my soul!
know that the Lord is thy God; it is he that has
made thee, and not thou thyself. 0 God! I am
the work of thy hands.

Henceforward, then, I will take no compla-
cency in myself, since, of myself, I am nothing.
What hast thou to glory in, 0 dust and ashes? or,
rather, thou very nothing! Why dost thou exalt
thyself? To humble myself, therefore, I resolve
to do such and such things, to suffer such and such
disgraces. I will change my life, I will hencefor-
ward follow my Creator, and esteem myself highly
honored by the being which he has given me, em-
ploying it entirely in obedience to his will, by
such means as I shall learn from my spiritual
father.

CONCLUSION.

1. Give thanks to God. Bless thy God, 0 my
soul ! and let all that is within me praise his holy
name; for his goodness has drawn me forth, and
his mercy has created me out of nothing. 2. Offer.
0 my God ! I offer to thee the being thou has given
me; from my heart I dedicate and consecrate it to
thee. 3. Pray. 0 God! strengthen me in these
affections and resolutions. 0 holy Virgin Mary!
recommend them to the mercy of thy Son, with all
those for whom I ought to pray.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

After your prayer, gather a little nosegay of devotion, to re-
fresh you during the rest of the day.


24 A DEVOUT LITE.


CHAPTER X.

SECOND MEDITATION.— ON THE END FOR WHICH WE WERE
CREATED.

PREPARATION.

J^LACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.

^5? Beseech him to inspire you.

CONST DERATIONS.

1 . God has d :>t placed you in this world because
he had need of you, for you are altogether unpro-
fitable to him, but only to exercise his goodness in
you, by giving you his grace and glory. To this
end he has given you an understanding, to know
him ; a memory, to be mindful of him ; a will, to
love him ; an imagination to represent his benefits
to yourself: eyes to behold his wonderful works ;
ti tongue, *o praise him ; and so of the other
faculties.

2. Being created, and placed in the world for
this end, all actions contrary to it are to be re-
jected, and whatever conduces not to it, ought to
be condemned as vain and superfluous.

3. Consider the wretchedness of worldlings,
who never think of their end, but live as if they
believed themselves created for no other purpose
than to build houses, plant trees, heap up riches,
ind amuse themselves with such like fooleries.

AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Confound yourself, and reproach your soul
irith her misery, which has been hitherto so gwat


THE END FOR WHICH WE WERE CREATED. 25

that she has seldom or never reflected on these
truths,

Alas ! Of what was I thinking, O my God !
when I thought not of thee ? What did I remem-
ber when I forgot thee? What did I love when
I loved not thee? I ought, alas ! to have fed upon
truth, and yet I glutted myself with vanity ; I
served the world, which was created only to serve
me.

2. Detest your past life. O vain thoughts and
unprofitable amusements, I renounce you ! O
hateful and frivolous remembrances, I abjure you !
O false and detestable friendships, lewd and
wretched slaveries, miserable gratifications and
irksome pleasures, I abhor you !

3. Return to God. O my God and my Saviour !
thou shalt henceforth be the sole object of my
thoughts. I will no longer apply my mind to
amusements which may be displeasing to thee.
My memory shall be occupied all the days of my
life with the recollection of the greatness of thy
clemency, so sweetly exercised towards me ; thou
shalt be the sole delight of my heart and the
sweetness of my affections.

Ah ! then the trifles and follies to which I have
hitherto applied myself; those vain employments
in which I have spent my days ; and those reflec-
tions in which I have engaged my heart, shall
henceforth be the object of my horror ; and with
this intention I will use such and such effectual
remedies.


26 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CONCLUSION.


1. Thank God, who has created you for so ex-
cellent an end. Thou hast made me, O Lord ! for
thyself, and for the eternal enjoyment of thy
incomprehensible glory ! O when shall I be worthy
of it ! When shall I bless thee as I ought ? 2 . Offer.
I offer to thee, O dear Creator ! all these affections
and resolutions, with my whole heart and soul. 3.
Pra}^. I beseech thee, O God ! to accept these my
desires and purposes, and to give thy blessing to
my soul, that it may be able to accomplish them,
through the merits of the blood of thy blessed Son
shed for me upon the cross.

Our Father. Hail Mary.

Make a little nosegay of devotion.


CHAPTER XI.

THIRD MEDITATION.— ON THE BENEFITS OF GOD.
PREPARATION.

J^LACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
-jLs? Beseech him to inspire you.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Consider the corporal benefits which God
has bestowed on you : what a body ! what conven-
iences to maintain it ! what health ! what lawful
comforts fo^ its us**- «nd recreations for its sup-


ON THE BENEFITS OF GOD. 27

port ! what friends and what assistances ! How
different is the situation of so many other persons,
more worthy than yourself, who are destitute of
these blessings ! Some are disabled in their bodies,
their health, or their limbs ; others abandoned, and
exposed to reproaches, contempt, and infamy;
others oppressed with poverty ; whilst God has
not suffered you to become so miserable.

2. Consider the gifts of the mind. How many
are there in the world stupid, frantic, or mad, and
why are not you of this number? Because God
has favored you. How many are there who have
been brought up rudely, and in gross ignorance?
and you, by God's providence, have received a
good and liberal education.

3. Consider the spiritual graces. O Philothea !
you are a child of the Catholic Church ; God has
taught you to know him, even from your child-
hood. How often has he given you his sacra-
ments? How man}' internal illuminations and
reprehensions for your amendment? How fre-
quently has he pardoned your faults ? How often
has he delivered you from those dangers of eternal
perdition to which you were exposed? And were
not all these years past given you as so many
favorable opportunities of working out your salva-
tion ? Consider a little, by descending to partic-
ulars, how sweet and gracious God has been to
you.

AFFECTION'S AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Admire the goodness of God. O how good
is my God to me ! O how good indeed ! How
rich is thy heart, O Lord, in mercy, and liberal in


28 A DEVOUT LIFE.

clemency ! O my soul ! let us recount forever the
many favors he has done us.

2. Wonder at your ingratitude. But what am
I, O Lord ! that thou shouldst have been so mindful
of me ? Ah ! how great is my unworthiness ! Alas !
I have trodden thy blessings under foot. I have
abused thy graces, perverting them to the dishonor
and contempt of thy sovereign goodness. I have
opposed the abyss of my ingratitude to the abyss
of thy bounty and favors.

3. Excite yourself to make an acknowledgment.
Well, then, O my heart ! resolve now to be no
more unfaithful, ungrateful, or disloyal to thy
great benefactor. And how? Shall not my soul
be henceforth wholly subject to God, who has
wrought so many wonders and graces in me and
for me?

4. Ah ! withdraw then your body, Philothea,
from such and such sensual pleasures, and conse-
crate it to the service of God, who has done so
much for it. Apply your soul to know and ac-
knowledge him by such exercises as are requisite
for that purpose. Employ diligently those means
which are in the Church to help you to save your
soul and love God. Yes, O my God ! I will be
diligent in frequenting prayer and the sacraments ;
I will listen to thy holy word, and put thy inspira-
tions and counsels in practice.

CONCLUSION.

Thank God for the knowledge which he has now
given you of your duty, and for all the benefits
which 3rou have hitherto received. 2. Offer him


ON SIN. 29

your heart, with all your resolutions. 3. Pray
that he would give you strength to practise them
faithfully, through the merits and death of his Di-
vine Son. Implore the intercession of the blessed
Virgin and of the saints.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
Make a little spiritual nosegay.


CHAPTER XII.

FOURTH MEDITATION. — ON SIN.
PREPARATION.

jpJ^LACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
•Jls? Beseech him to inspire you.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Call to mind how long it is since you began
to sin, and reflect how much, since that time, sin
has multiplied in your heart ; how every day you
have increased the number of }Tour sins against
God, your neighbor, and yourself, by work, by
word, or by desire.

2. Consider your evil inclinations, and how far
you have followed them ; and by these two points
you shall discover that your sins are more numer-
ous than the hairs of your head, yea, than the
sands of the sea.


50 A DEVOUT LIFE.

S. Consider in particular tne sin or ingratitude
against God, which is a general sin, that extends
itself over all the rest, and makes them infinitely
more enormous. Consider then how many bene-
fits God has bestowed on you, and how you have
abused them all, by turning them against the
giver. Reflect in particular how many inspira-
tions you have despised, how many good motion*:
you have rendered unprofitable, and, above all
how many times you have received the sacraments,
and where are the fruits of them? What are be
come of those precious jewels wherewith your deal
spouse has adorned you? All these have beer)
buried under your iniquities. With what prep-
aration have you received them? Think on this
ingratitude : that God having run so often after
you, to save you, you have always run from him
to lose yourself.

AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Be confounded at your misery. O my God )
How dare I appear in thy presence? I am, alas !
out the corruption of the world ; a sink of ingrati-
tude and iniquity. Is it possible that I should have
been so ungrateful as not to have left any one of
the senses of my body, or of the powers of my
soul, which I have not corrupted, violated, and de-
filed, and that not so much as one day of my life has
passed which has not produced its wicked effects ?
Is this the return I should have made for the bene-
fits of my Creator and the blood of my Redeemer?

2. Crave pardon, and cast yourself at the feet
of our Lord, like the prodigal son, like Magda-


ON SIN. Oi

len, or like a woman who has defiled her marriage
bed with all kind of adultery. Have mercy, O
Lord, upon this poor sinner! Alas! O living
fountain of compassion ! have pity on this mis-
erable wretch.

3. Resolve to live better. No, O Lord! never
more, with the help of thy grace, never more
will I abandon myself to sin. Alas ! I have al-
ready loved it too much ; I detest it now, and I
embrace thee. O Father of mercies ! I resolve
to live and die in thee.

4. To expiate my past sins, I will accuse my-
self of them courageously, and will banish every
one of them from my heart.

5. I will use all possible endeavors to eradi-
cate the sources of ihem from my heart ; and in
particular such and such vices to which I am
most inclined.

6. To accomplish this, I will fervently em-
brace the means which I shall be advised to
adopt, and will think that I have never done
enough to repair such grevious offences.

CONCLUSION".

Return thanks to God for waiting for you till
this hour, and bless him for having given you
these good affections. 2. Offer him your heart,
that you may put them in execution. 3. Implore
him to strengthen you.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
Make a spiritual nosegay.


32 A DEVOUT LITE.


CHAPTER XIII.

FIFTH MEDITATION. — ON DEATH.
PREPARATION.

►LACE yourself in the presence of God 2,
Beseech him to inspire you by his grace. 3.
Imagine yourself to he in the extremity of sick-
ness, lying on your death-bed, without any hope
of recovery.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1 . Consider the uncertainty of the da/ of your
death. O my soul ! thou shalt one day depart
out of this body! but when shall the time be?
Shall it be in winter or in summer? In the city
or in the country ? By day or by night ? Shall it
be suddenly or after due preparation? By sick-
ness or by accident ? Shalt thou have leisure to
make thy confession ? Shalt thou be assisted by
thy spiritual father? Alas! of all this we know
nothing ; one thing only is certain : we shall die,
and sooner than we imagine.

2. Consider that then the world shall end for
you, for it shall last no longer to you ; it shall be
reversed before your eyes ; for then the pleas-
ures, the vanities, the worldly joys, and vain
affections, of your life, shall seem like empty
shadows and airy clouds. Ah, wretch ! for what
toys and deceitful vanities have I offended my
£k)d? You shall then see that, for a mere


ON DEATH. 33

nothing, you have forsaken him. On the other
hand, devotion and good works will then seem
to you sweet and delightful, Oh, why did I not
follow this lovely and pleasant path? Then the
sins which before seemed very small will appear a^
large as mountains, and your devotion very small.
2. Consider the Ions; and languishing farewell
which your soul shall then give to this poor
world? She shall then bid adieu to riches, vani-
ties, and vain company ; to pleasures, pastimes,
friends, and neighbors ; to kindred, children,
husband, and wife; in a word, to every crea-
ture ; and finally to her own body, which she
shall leave pale, ghastly, hideous, and loathsome.

4. Consider with what precipitancy they will
carry off this body to bury it under the earth ;
after which the world will think no more of
you than you have thought of others. (' The
peace of God be with him," shall they say, and
that is all. O death ! how void art thou of re-
gard or pity !

5. Consider how the soul, being departed from
the body, takes her flight to the right hand or
to the left. Alas! whither shall yours go?
what way shall it take? Xo other than that
which it began here in this world.

AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Pray to God, and cast yourself into his arms.
Ah ! receive me, O Lord ! into thy protection at
that dreadful da}' ; make that hour happy and
favorable to me ; and rather let all the other days
of my life be sad and sorrowful.


34 A DEVOUT LIFE.

2. Despise the world. Since then I know not
the hour in which I must leave thee, O wretched
world ! i will no more set my heart on thee. O
my dear friends and relations ! pardon me if I
love you no more, but with a holy friendship,
which may last eternally ; for why should 1 unite
myself to you, since I shall be one day forced to
break those ties asunder?

I will then prepare myself for that hour, and
take all possible care to end this journey happily ;
I will secure the state of my conscience to the
best of my power, and will form immediate and
efficacious resolutions for the amendment of
such and such defects.


CONCLUSION.

Give thanks to God for these resolutions which
he has given you. Offer them to his Divine
Majesty. Beseech him to grant you a happy
death, through the merits of the death of his
beloved Son ; implore the assistance of the blessed
Virgin and the saints in heaven.


Our Father. Hail Mary.
Make a nosegay of myrrh.


ON JUDGMENT. 35

CHAPTER XIV.

SIXTH MEDiTATION —ON JUDGMENT,
PREPARATION.

J^LACE yourself before God. 2. Beseech him
J& to inspire you.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. After the time God has prescribed for the
duration of this world ; after many dreadful signs
and presages, which shall cause men to wither
away through fear and apprehension ; a fire, raging
like a torrent, shall burn and reduce to ashes the
whole face of the earth ; nothing that exists shall
escape its fury.

2. After this deluge of flames and of thunderbolts,
all men shall rise from their graves, excepting such
as are already risen, and at the voice of the angel
they shall appear in the valley of Josaphat. But,
alas ! with what difference ! for some shall arise
with glorious and resplendent bodies ; others in
bodies most hideous and frightful.

3. Consider the majesty with which the Sover-
eign Judge will appear, surrounded by all the
angels and saints. Before him shall be borne his
cross, shining m re brilliantly than the sun; a
standard of mercy to the good, and of rigor to the
wicked.

4. This Sovereign Judge, by his awful com-
mand, which shall be suddenly executed, shall
separate the good from the bad, placing the one at


36 A DEVOUT LIFE.

his right hand, and the other at his left. O ever-
lasting separation, after which these two companies
shall never more meet together !

5. This separation being made, and the hook of
conscience opened, all men shall clearly see the
malice of the wicked, and their contempt of divine
grace ; and, on the other hand, the penitence of the
good, and the effect of the grace which they have
received ; for nothing shall be hidden. O good
God ! what confusion will this be to the one, and
what consolation to the other !

6. Consider the last sentence of the wicked :
"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
which was prepared for the devil and his angelse"
Ponder well these awful words . " Depart from me . "
A sentence of eternal banishment against those
miserable wretches, excluding them from his pres-
ence for all eternity. He calls them cursed. O
my soul, what a curse ! a general curse, including
all manner of evils ! — a general curse, which com-
prises all time and eternity ! He adds, "into ever-
lasting fire ! " Behold, O my heart ! this vast eter-
nity. O eternal eternity of pains, how dreadful art
thou !

7. Consider the contrary sentence of the good.
''Come," saith the Judge. O the sweet word of
salvation, by which God draws us to himself, and
receives us into the bosom of his goodness ! "Ye
blessed of my Father." O dear blessing, which
comprises all blessings ! " Possess the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world."
O good God ! what an excess of bounty ! for this
kinodom shall never have an end.


ON JUDGMENT. 37


AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

1. Tremble, O my soul ! at the remembrance of
these things. O my God ! who shall secure me
in that day when the pillars of heaven shall tremble
for fear !

2. Detest your sins, which alone can condemn
on that dreadful day.

Ah ! I will judge myself now that I may not be
judged then ! I will examine my conscience, and
condemn myself; I will accuse myself, and amend
my life, that the eternal Judge may not condemn
me on that dreadful day. I will, therefore, confess
ny sins, and receive all necessary advice.

CONCLUSION.

Thank God, who has given you the means of
providing for your security at that day, and tune
to do penance. Offer him your heart to perform
it. Beg of him to give you the grace duly tc
accomplish it.

Our Father. Hail Mary.
Make your spiritual nosegay.


38 A DEVOUT LIFE-.

CHAPTER XV.

SEVENTH MEDITATION. —ON HELL-
PREPARATION.

J^LACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
a^5? Humble yourself, and implore his assistance.
3. Represent to yourself a city involved in dark-
ness, burning with brimstone and stinking pitch,
and full of inhabitants who cannot make their es-
cape.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. The damned are in the abyss of hell, as
within a woful city, where they suffer unspeakable
torments in all their senses and members, because
as they have employed all their senses and their
members in sinning, so shall they suffer in each of
them the punishment due to sin. The eyes for
lascivious looks shall endure the horrible sight of
devils and of hell. The ears, for having taken
delight in vicious discourses, shall hear nothing
but wailings, lamentations, desperate howlings ;
and so of the rest.

2. Besides all these torments, there is yet a
greater, which is the privation and loss of the glory
of God, from the sight of which the damned are
excluded for ever. Now, if Absalom found the
privation of the amiable face of his father, David,
more grievous to him than his banishment, good
God ! what grief will it cause to be forever excluded


ON HELL. 39

from the sight of thy most sweet and gracious
countenance ?

3. Consider, above all, the eternity of those
pains, which alone makes hell insupportable.
Alas ! if a little insect in your ear, or the heat of
a fever, makes one short night seem so long and
tedious, how terrible will the night of eternity be,
accompanied with so many torments ! From this
eternity proceed eternal despair, infinite rage, and
blasphemies, etc.

AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS.

Terrify your soul with the words of the prophet
Isaiah. O my soul ! art thou able to dwell with
this devouring fire ? Canst thou endure to dwell
with everlasting burning? Canst thou think of
parting with thy God forever?

Confess that you have often deserved it. But
henceforward I will take a new course ; for why
should I go down into this bottomless pit ? I will
use such and such endeavors to avoid sin, which
alone can brino- me to this eternal death. Give
thanks, offer, pray.

Our Father. Hail Mary.


40 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER XVI.

EIGHTH MEDITATION.— ON HEAVEN.
PREPARATION.

^l^LACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
a^ Beseech him to inspire you with his grace.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Consider a fair and clear night, and reflect
how delightful it is to behold the sky bespangled
with all that multitude and variety of stars ; then
join this beautiful sight with that of a tine day, so
that the brightness of the sun may not prevent the
clear view of the stars nor of the moon ; and then
say boldly that all this beauty put together is
nothing when compared with the excellence of the
great heavenly paradise. O how lovely, how de-
sirable is this place ! O how precious is this city !

2. Consider the glory, the beauty, and the mul-
titude of the inhabitants of this happy country;
millions of millions of angels, of cherubin and ser-
aphin ; choirs of apostles, prophets, martyrs, con-
fessors, virgins, and holy women ; the multitude is
innumerable. O how glorious is this company !
the least of them is more beautiful to behold than
the whole world ; what a sight then will it be to
behold them all ! But, O my God ! bow happy are
they ! they sing incessantly harmonious songs of
eternal love ! they always enjoy a state of felicity ;


ON HEAVEN. 41

they mutually give each other unspeakable con-
tentment, and live in the consolation of a happy,
indissoluble society.

3. In line, consider how happy the blessed are
in the enjoyment of God, who favors them for-
ever with a sight of his lovely presence, and
thereby infuses into their hearts a treasure of
delights. How great a felicity must it be to be
united to their first principle, their Sovereign Good.
They are like happy birds, flying and singing
perpetually in the air of his divinity, which en-
compasses them on all sides with incredible pleas-
ure. There every one does his utmost, and sing.^
without envy the praises of his Creator. Blessed
be thou forever, O sweet and sovereign Creato?'
and Saviour, who art so good, and who dost com
municate to us so liberally the everlasting treas
ures of thy glory ! And blessed forever be }Tou
says he, p\v beloved creatures, who have serve*
me so faithfully, with love and constancy ; behold
you shall be admitted to sing my praises forever.


AFFECTIONS AXD RESOLUTIONS.


1. Admire and praise this heavenly country.

0 how beautiful art thou, my dear Jerusalem ! and
how happy are thy inhabit ants.

2. Reproach your heart with the pusillanimity
with which it has hitherto strayed so far out of
the way of this glorious habitation. Oh ! why have

1 wandered at so great a distance from my sover
eign happiness? Ah ! wretch that I am, for these
false and trifling pleasures I have a thousand and
a thousand times turned my back upon these eter~


42 A DEVOUT LITE.

nal and infinite delights. Was I not mad to despise
such precious blessings for gratifications so vain
and contemptible ?

3. Aspire with fervor to this most delightful
abode. O good and gracious Lord ! since it has
pleased thee at length to direct my wandering
steps into thy ways, never hereafter will I return
back from them. Let us go, O my dear soul !
let us walk towards this blessed land which is
promised us: what are we doing in Egypt? I
will therefore disburden myself of all such things
as may divert or retard me in so happy a journey ;
I will perform such and such things as may con-
duct me thither.

Give thanks, offer, pray.

Our Father. Hail Mary.


>>*;<


CHAPTER XVII.

NINTH MEDITATION.— BY WAY OF ELECTION AND CHOICE OF
HEAVEN.

PREPARATION.

SOLACE yourself in the presence of God. 2.
*^s? Humble yourself before him, and beseech
him to inspire you with his grace. 3. Imagine
yourself to be in an open field, alone with your
good angel, like young Tobias going to Rages,
Imagine that he shows you heaven open above,
^vith all the pleasures represented in the last medL


ELECTION AND CHOICE OF HEAVEN. 43

tation ; and that then he shows you beneath hell
open, with all the torments described in the medi-
tation on hell. Beino- thus situated in iniagi-
nation, and kneeling before your good angel,
make the following

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Consider that you are certainly placed be-
tween heaven and hell ; and that both the one and
the other lie open to receive you, according to the
choice which you shall make.

2. Consider that the choice which we make in
this world shall last for all eternity in the world
to come.

3. And though both the one and the other be
open to receive you according to your choice, yet
God, who is ready to give you either the one by
his justice, or the other by his mercy, wishes,
nevertheless, with an incomparable desire, that
you would choose heaven ; and your good angel
also importunes you to it with all his power, of-
fering you, in God's name, a thousand graces, and
a thousand assistances to help you to obtain it.

4. Consider that Jesus Christ in his clemency
looks down upon you from above, and graciously
invites you, saying, "Come, my dear soul, to en-
joy an everlasting rest, within the arms of my
goodness, where I have prepared immortal delights
for thee in the abundance of my love." Behold
likewise, with your interior eyes, the blessed
Virgin, who with maternal tenderness exhorts you,
saying, "Take courage, my child ; despise not the
desires of my Son, nor the many sighs which I


44 A DEVOUT LIFE.

have cast forth for thee, thirsting with him for thy
eternal salvation." Behold the saints also exhort
you, and millions of blessed souls sweetly invite
you ; they wish for nothing more than to see your
heart one day united with theirs in praising and
loving God forever ; and assure you that the way
to heaven is not so difficult as the world would
persuade you. " Be of good heart, dear brother,"
say they ; "he that diligently considers the way of
devotion by which we ascended hither, shall see
that we acquired these immortal delights by pleas-
ures incomparably more sweet than those of the
world."

ELECTION.

1. O hell ! I detest thee now and forevermore ;
I detest thy torments and pains ; I detest thy
accursed and miserable eternity ; and above all, I
detest those eternal blasphemies and maledictions
which thou vomitest out against my God. And,
turning my heart and my soul towards thee, O
heavenly paradise, everlasting glory, and endless
felicity ! I choose my habitation forever within
thy holy and most lovely tabernacles. I bless thy
mercy, O my God ! and I accept of the offer which
thou art pleased to make me. O Jesus, my sweet
Saviour ! I accept thy everlasting love, and the
place which thou hast purchased for me in this
blessed Jerusalem ; not so much for any other
motive, as to love and bless thee forever and
ever.

2. Accept the favors which the blessed Virgin
and the saints offer you. Promise to make the
best of . your way to join their company ; and give


CHOICE WHICH THE SOUL MAKES. 45

your hand to your good angel, that he may con-
duct you ; encourage your soul to make this
choice.
Our Father. Hail Mary.


>*«<


CHAPTER XVIII.

TENTh MEDITATION. — BY WAY OF ELECTION, AND CHOICE WHICr

THE SOUL MAKES OF A DEVOUT LIFE.

PREPARATION.

►LACE yourself in the presence of God, %.
Humble yourself before him, and implore his
assistance.

CONSIDERATIONS.

1. Imagine yourself again to be in an open field,
fllone with your good angel ; and that you see the
devil on your left hand, seated on a lofty throne,
attended by many hellish spirits, environed by a
numerous band of worldlings, who submissively
Acknowledge him for their lord, and do him
homage, some by one sin, and some by another.
Dbserve the countenances of all the wretched
courtiers of this abominable king. Behold some
of them transported with hatred, envy, and pas-
sion ; others killing one another ; others consumed
with cares, pensive and anxious to heap up riches ;
others hftnt. nnou vanity, unable to obtain any but
empty and unprofitable pleasures ; others wailow-


46 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ing in the mire, buried and putrified in their
brutish affections. Behold, there is no rest, no
order, nor decency amongst them. Behold how
they despise each other, and love in appearance
only. In a word, you shall see a wretched com-
monwealth, miserably tyrannized OA^er by this
cursed kin£ which will move you to compassion.
2. On the right hand, behold Jesus Christ
crucified, who, with a cordial love, prays for these
poor enslaved people, that they may be freed from
the sway of this tyrant; and calls them to himself;
behold around him, a band of devout souls with
their angels. Contemplate the beauty of this
kingdom of devotion. Oh, what a sight ! to see
this troop of virgins, men and women, whiter than
lilies ; this assembly of widows, full of holy mor-
tification and humility ! See the ranks of divers
married people living together with mutual respect,
which cannot be without great charity. Behold
how these devout souls join the exterior care of
the house with the care of the interior, the lo\e of
the husband or wife with that of the heavenly
Spouse. Consider them all universally, and you
shall see them in a holy, sweet, and lovely order,
attending on our Lord, whom every one would
willingly plant in the midst of his heart. They are
joyful ; but it is with a comely, charitable, and
well-ordered joy ; they love each other ; but their
love is most pure and holy. Such as suffer afflic-
tions amongst this devout people, are perfectly re-
signed, and never lose courage. To conclude,
behold how they look on our Saviour, who com-
forts them, and how they altogether aspire to him.


CHOICE WHICH THE SOUL MAKES. 47

3. You have already left Satan, with all his
execrable troop, by the good affections you have
conceived ; but you have not as yet enrolled your-
self under the standard of the King Jesus, nor
united with his blessed company of devout souls,
but you have been hitherto hesitating between the
one and the other.

4. The blessed Virgin, with St. Joseph, St.
Lewis, St. Monica, and a hundred thousand others,
who have lived in the midst of the world, invite
and encourage you.

5. The crucified King calls you by name : Come,
O my well beloved ! come, that I may crown
thee !

ELECTION .

O world ! O abominable troop ! No, never shall
you see me under your banners ! I have forever
abandoned your trifles and vanities. O king of
pride ! O accursed king ! infernal spirit ! I re-
nounce thee with all thy vain pomps, I detest thee
with all thy works.

2. And, turning myself to thee, my dear Jesus !
King of eternal glory and happinness ! I embrace
thee with all the powers of my soul ! I adore thee
with my whole heart, and choose thee now and for-
ever for my king ; with this inviolable fidelity, I
pay thee irrevocable homage, and submit myself
to the obedience of thy holy laws and ordinances.

3. O sacred Virgin ! beloved Mother ! I choose
thee for my guide, I put myself under thy pro-
tection ; I offer thee a particular respect and spe-
cial reverence.

4. 0 my good Angel ! present me to this sacred


48 A DEVOUT LIFE.

assembly, and forsake me not till I am associated
to this blessed company, with whom I say, and
will say forever in testimony of my choice, live
Jesus, live Jesus !

Our Father. Hail Mary.


CHAPTER XIX.

HOW TO MAKE A GENERAL CONFESSION.

Jj^EHOLD here then, my dear Philothea. the
»ai meditations necessary for our purpose. When
you shall have made them all, proceed courage-
ously in the spirit of humility to make your gen-
eral confession; but, I beseech you, suffer not
yourself to be disturbed with any kind of appre-
hension. The sting of the scorpion is poisonous ;
but the scorpion being reduced to oil, becomes a
sovereign remedy against the venom of its own
sting. Sin is shameful only when we commit it ;
but, being converted into confession and penance,
it becomes honorable and wholesome, — contrition
and confession being so beautiful and odoriferous
as to efface its deformity and purify its stench.
Simon the leper said that Magdalen was a sinner,
but our Lord said no, alluding to the sweet
perfumes she poured forth, and the greatness of
her love. If we be very humble, Philothea, our sins
will infinitely displease us, because God is offended
by them ; but the accusation of them will becon?*


HOW TO MAKE A GENERAL CONFESSION. 49

sweet and agreeable, because God is honored
thereby ; for it is a kind of comfort to acquaint the
physician rightly with the nature of the evil that
torments us.

2. When you kneel before your spiritual father,
imagine that you are on Mount Calvary, under the
feet of Jesus Christ crucilied, whose precious
blood distils on all sides to wash and cleanse you
from your iniquities. For, though it be not the
very blood of our Saviour, yet it is the merit of
his blood shed for us that waters abundantly the
soul of the penitent at the confession seat. Open
then your heart perfectly, that you may cast out
your sins by confession ; for, as fast as they depart
from your heart, the precious merits of the passion
of your Divine Saviour will enter in, to fill it with
his graces and blessings.

3. But be sure to declare all with candor and
sincerity. Having fully satisfied your conscience
that you have done so, listen to the admonitions
and ordinances of your confessor, and say in your
heart, " Speak Lord ! for thy servant heareth." — 1
Kings iii. 10. Yea, Philothea, it is God whom
you hear ; since he has said to his vicegerents, ff He
that heareth you heareth me." — St. Luke x. 16t

4. Afterwards make the following protestation,
which may serve for a conclusion of your contri-
tion, and on which you ought first to have medi-
tated and reflected. Read it attentively, and with
as much devotion as you possibly can.


50 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER XX.

AN AUTHENTIC PROTESTATION, TO ENGRAVE IN THE SOUL THt
RESOLUTION TO SERVE GOO, AND TO CONCLUDE THE ACTS
OF PENANCE.

Wc N. N., in the presence of the eternal God, and
^' of the whole court of heaven, having considered
the infinite mercy of his divine goodness towards
me, a most unworthy and wretched creature, whom
he has created out of nothing, preserved, sup-
ported, and delivered from so many dangers, and
loaded with so many benefits ; but considering,
above all, the incomprehensible sweetness and
clemency with Avhich this merciful God has so
graciously borne my iniquities ; so frequently
called upon me and invited me to amendment,
and so patiently waited for my repentance and
conversion until this present time, notwithstanding
the innumerable instances of ingratitude, dis-
loyalty, and infidelity, by which I have despised
his grace, rashly offended him, and deferred my
conversion from day to day ; having, moreover,
reflected that upon the day of my holy baptism I
was dedicated to God, to be his child ; and that,
contrary to the profession then made in my name,
[ have so often, so execrably and detestably, pro-
faned and violated all the powers of my soul and
the senses of my body, applying and employing
them against his divine majesty ; at length,
returning to myself, prostrate in spirit before the


AN AUTHENTIC PROTESTATION. 51

throne of the divine justice, I acknowledge, avow,
and confess myself lawfully attainted and convicted
of treason against God, and guilty of the death
and passion of Jesus Christ, on account of the sins
I have committed, for which he died and suffered
the torment of the cross ; so that, consequently, I
deserve to be cast away and condemned forever.
But, turning myself towards the throne of the
infinite mercy of the same eternal God, having
detested with my whole heart and strength the
many iniquities of my past life, I most humbly
beg pardon, grace, and mercy, with an entire
absolution from them, by virtue of the death and
passion of this same Lord and Redeemer of my
soul, on which relying, as on the only foundation
of my hope, I confirm again and renew the sacred
profession of allegiance to my God made in my
behalf at my baptism; renouncing the devil, the
world and the flesh ; detesting their base sugges-
tions, vanities, and concupiscences during the resi-
due of my mortal life, and for all eternity. And,
turning myself towards my most gracious and
merciful God, I desire, purpose, and am irrevo-
cably resolved to serve and love him now and
forever ; and to this end, I give and consecrate to
him my soul with all its powers, my heart with
all its affections, and my body with all its senses,
protesting that I will never more abuse any part
of my being againsc his divine will and sovereign
majesty, to whom I offer up and sacrifice myself
in spirit, to be forever his loyal, obedient, and
faithful creature, without ever revoking or repent-
ing of this my act and deed.


52 A DEVOUT LIFE.

But if, alas ! I should chance, through the
suggestion of the enemy, or through human frailty,
to transgress in any point, or fail in adhering to
this my resolution and dedication, I protest from
this moment, and am determined, with the assist-
ance of the Holy Ghost, to rise as soon as I shall
perceive my fall, and return again to the divine
mercy, without any delay whatsoever. This is
my inviolable and irrevocable will, intention, and
resolution, which I declare and confirm without
reservation or exception, in the sacred presence of
God, in the sight of the Church triumphant, and in
presence of the Church militant, my mother, which
hears this my declaration in the person of him who,
as her officer, hears me in this action.

May it please thee, O my God ! eternal, al-
mighty, and all-gracious Father, Son and Holy
Ghost ! to confirm in me this resolution, and to
accept this inward sacrifice of my heart, in the
odor of sweetness. And as it hath pleased thee
to inspire me with the will to do this, so grant me
the strength and grace to perform it. O my God !
thou art my God, the God of my heart, the God
of my soul, and the God of my spirit : as such I
acknowledge and as such I adore thee now and
forever. Live, O Jesus !


INFERENCES DRAWN FROM THE FOREGOING. 53

CHAPTER XXI.

INFERENCES DRAWN FROM THE FOREGOING PROTESTATION.

HEAVING made this protestation, open the ears
^^ of your heart to hear the sentence of absolu-
tion, which the Saviour of your soul, seated on the
throne of his mercy, will pronounce before all the
angels and saints in heaven, at the same instant
that the priest, in his name, absolves you here
upon earth ; so that all this blessed company,
rejoicing at your conversion, will sing a spiritual
canticle with incomparable joy, and each of them
give the kiss of peace and fellowship to your
heart, now restored to grace and sanctity.

Good God ! Philothea ! what an admirable
contract, what a happy treaty do you here enter
into with the divine Majesty ! By giving your-
self to him, you not only receive himself in ex-
change, but eternal life also. Nothing, therefore,
further remains but cheerfully to sign, with a
sincere heart, the act of your protestation ; then
approach with confidence to the altar, where God
will reciprocally sign and seal your absolution,
and the promise he makes you of his heavenly
kingdom, putting himself, in the blessed sacra-
ment, as a seal or signet upon your renovated
heart.

Thus shall your soul, O Philothea ! be not only
purged from sin, but from the affections thereto.
But as these affections easily spring up again in


54 A DEVOUT LIFE.

the soul, as well through the weakness of depraved
nature as through concupiscence, which may be
mortified, but can never die whilst we dwell in
this mortal body, I will give you some instruc-
tions, which, if diligently practised, will preserve
you so effectually from mortal sin and all affection
to it, that they will never find place in your heart
hereafter ; but, in order that they may contribute
to a still more perfect purification, I will previously
say something of that absolute purity to which I
am desirous of conducting you.


>n&


CHAPTER XXII.

THAT WE MUST PURIFY OURSELVES FROM AFFECTION TO
VENIAL SINS.

JS at the approach of daylight we perceive
more clearly in a mirror the spots and stains
that disfigure our faces, so, as the inward light of
the Holy Spirit more and more enlightens our
consciences, we see in a more distinct and clear
manner the sins, inclinations, and imperfections
which prevent us from attaining to true devotion ,
and the same light which enables us to perceive
diose spots and blemishes inflames us with a desire
to cleanse and purify ourselves from them.

You will, then, discover, my dear Philothea,
that, besides mortal sins and the affection to them,
from which you have been purified by the fore-


WE MUST PURIFY OURSELVES. 55

going exercises, there still remain in your soul
several inclinations and affections to venial sins. I
do not say that you shall discover the venial sins
themselves, but your affections and inclinations to
them ; because the one is very different from the
other ; for although we can never be altogether so
pure from venial sins as to continue for a long
time without committing them, yet we need not
entertain any voluntary affection for them. Surely
it is one thing to tell a lie now and then in jest,
or in matters of small importance, and another to
take pleasure in lying, and retain an affection for it
on every occasion.

I therefore say that we must purge the soul
from every affection to venial sins ; that is to say,
we must not voluntarily nourish the desire of
persevering in any kind of venial tsm, be it ever so
small ; because it displeases God, though not to
that degree as to cause him to cast us off or damn
us for it. Now, if venial sin offends him, the will
and affection which wc retain to venial sin is no
better than a resolution to entertain the desire of
displeasing his divine Majesty ; but is it possible
that a generous soul should not only consent to
offend her God, but also to retain with affection
the desire of offending him?

Such affections, Philothea, are as directly op-
posite to devotion as an affection to mortal sin is
contrary to charity ; they depress and weaken the
spirit, prevent divine consolations, open the gate
to temptations, and although they kill not, yet
they make the soul extremely sick. " Dying flies,''
says the wise man, " spoil the sweetness of the oint-


56 A DEVOUT LIFE.

merit." — Eccles. x. 1. His meaning is, that flies
which stay not long upon the ointment, but only
taste it in passing by, spoil no more than they take,
the rest remaining sound ; but those which die in the
ointment, deprive it of its sweetness. Thus venial
sins, which come upon a devout soul, and stay not
long there, do it no great damage ; but if they
dwell in it by affection, they make it lose the
sweetness of ointment, that is, holy devotion.

Spiders kill not the bees, but they spoil and
corrupt their honey, and so entangle the honey-
combs with their web that the bees cannot go
forward in their work ; now this is to be under-
stood when the spiders make any stay among
them. In like manner, venial sin kills not the
soul, but it spoils devotion and entangles the
powers of the soul so much with bad habits and
vicious inclinations, that she can no longer exert
that promptitude of charity in which devotion con-
sists, but this also is to be understood, when venial
sin continues to dwell in our hearts, by the affec-
tion with which we cherish it.

It is not a matter of great consequence, Philo-
thea, to tell some trifling lie, to fall into some
little irregularity in words, in actions, in looks, in
dress, in mirth, in play, in dancing, provided that
as soon as these spiritual spiders are entered intc
our conscience we chase and drive them away, as
the bees do the corporal spiders ; but if we permit
them to remain in our hearts, if we cherish the
desire of retaining and multiplying them, Ave shall
soon find our honey destroyed, and the hive of our
conscience corrupted and ruined. Pu» I say once


AMUSEMENTS. 57

more, what probability is there that a generous
soul should take pleasure in displeasing her God,
or affect what would be disagreeable to him, or
willingly do that which she knows would give him
offence ?


>XKc


CHAPTER XXIII.

THAT WE OUGHT TO PURIFY OURSELVES FROM AN AFFECTION TO

UNPROFITABLE AMUSEMENTS.

J^LAY, dancing, feasting, dress, and theatrical
<^s? shows, being things which, considered in their
substance, are not evil, but indifferent, and such as
may be used either well or ill ; nevertheless, as all
these things are dangerous, to bear an affection to
them is still more dangerous. I say then, Philo-
thea, that although it be lawful to play, to dance,
to dress, to feast, or to be present at innocent
comedies,1 yet to have an affection to such things
is not only contrary to devotion, but also extremely
hurtful and dangerous. The evil does not consist
in doing such things, but in a fond attachment to
them. Ah, what a pity to sow, in the soil of our
heart, such vain and foolish affections, which take
up the room of good impressions, and hinder the


1 It is not the meaning of the saint in this passage to justify the as
sisting at any such comedies, or other plays, as have a tendency to en-
courage vice, or irreligion; or which serve to inflame the passions, to
enervate the soul, and to dispose her to impure love, which is too often
the case with our modern plays. For such as these the holy prelate
would by no means allow to be innocent, but rather would loudly con*
<lenm them, as the holy fathers and saints have always done.


58 A DEVOUT LIFE.

sap of our soul from being employed in good in-
clinations !

Thus the ancient Nazareans abstained not only
from whatever might inebriate, but also from the
grape itself; not from an apprehension that the
grape could intoxicate them, but lest by tasting
the grape they might be tempted to drink of the
wine also. Now, I do not say that we can never
use these dangerous things, but I affirm that we can
never set our affections upon them without preju-
dice to devotion. As the stags, when grown too
fat, retire into their thickets, because, being en-
cumbered with flesh, they know that they are not
in a condition to run, should they be hunted, so
the heart of man, burdening itself with these un-
profitable, superfluous, and dangerous affections,
cannot certainly run after its God, the true ppint
of devotion, readily, lightly, and easily. Let
children please and fatigue themselves with pursu-
ing butterflies, yet no one finds fault with them,
because they are children ; but is it not ridiculous,
or rather lamentable, to see persons advanced m
years fix their heart and affections upon such toys
and trifles as those which I have named, which are
not only unprofitable, but which put us in imminent
danger of falling into many irregularities and dis-
orders in the pursuit of them? Wherefore, my
dear Philothea, I say, we must purge ourselves
from these affections ; for though the acts are not
always contrary to devotion, yet the affections are
always prejudicial to it.


VENIAL SINS TO BE OVERCOME. 5&

CHAPTER XXIV.

THAT WE MUST PURGE OURSELVES FROM OUR EVIL INCLINATIONS.

^jfcF-E have, moreover, Philothea, certain natural
e|0|o inclinations, which, though they spring from
our particular sins, yet are not properly sins, either
mortal or venial, but are called imperfections ; and
the acts which proceed from them are termed
defects and failings. For example, St. Paula,
according to St. Jerom, had so great an inclina-
tion to sadness that at the death of her children
and husband she was in danger of dying with
grief. This was an imperfection, but not a sin, be-
cause she had it against her will.

There are some people who are naturally of a
light, others of a morose temper; some of an
obstinate disposition, others inclined to indigna-
tion; some prone to anger, others to love; in
short, there are few in whom we may not observe
some of these imperfections. Now, although they
are peculiar and natural to each of us, yet by care
and a contrary affection, we may not only correct
and moderate them, but even altogether free our-
selves from them ; and I tell you, Philothea, it is
necessary that you should do so. As a means has
been discovered to change bitter almond trees into
sweet, by piercing them at the bottom to let out
the juice, why may not we let out the juice of our
perverse inclinations, and become better? For as
there is no nature, though never so good, which


60 A DEVOUT LIFE.

may not be perverted to evil by vicious habits, so
there is no disposition, though never so perverse,
that may not, by the grace of God and our own
industry, be brought under and overcome.

Wherefore, I shall now proceed to give you
such instructions, and propose such exercises as
may help to purge your soul, as well from your
imperfections as from all dangerous affection to
venial sins, and secure your conscience more ef-
fectually against all mortal sin. May God grant
you the grace to reduce them to practice !


$art Secotttr*


CONTAINING VARIOUS INSTRUCTIONS FOR ELEVATING THE
SOUL TO GOD BY PRAYER AND THE SACRAMENTS.


CHAPTER I.

OF THE NECESSITY OF PRAYER.

J^RAYEE places our understanding in the bright-
aEs* ness and light of God, and exposes our will to
the heat of heavenly love. There is nothing that
so effectually purges our understanding from its
ignorance, or our will from its depraved affections,
as prayer. It is the water of benediction, which
makes the plants of our good desires grow green
and nourish, which washes our souls from their
imperfections, and quenches the thirst of passion
in our hearts.

But, above all, I recommend to you mental
prayer, or the prayer of the heart, and particu-
larly that which has for its object the life and
passion of our Lord. By making him the fre-
quent subject of your meditation, your whole sou*
will be replenished with him ; you will imbibe his
spirit, and frame all your actions according to the
model of his. As he is the light of the world, it
is then in him, by him, and for him. that we ought
to acquire lustre, and be enlightenea. He is the


62 A DEVOUT LIFE.

tree of desire, under whose shadow we ought to
refresh ourselves. He is the living fountain of
Jacob, in which we may wash away all our stains.
In fine, as little children, by hearing their mothers
talk, lisp at first, and learn at length to speak their
language, so we, by keeping close to our Saviour,
by meditation and observing his words, actions,
and affections, shall, by the help of his grace,
learn to speak, to act, and to will like him. Here
we must stop, Philothea, as we cannot find access
to God the Father, but through this gate ; for, as
the mirror could never terminate our sight, if the
back of it were not tinned or leaded, so we could
never contemplate the divinity in this world, had
we not been united to the sacred humanity of our
Saviour, whose life and death is the most delight-
ful, sweet, and profitable object we can select for
our ordinary meditation. It is not without reason
that our Saviour called himself the bread that
came down from heaven ; for, as bread is to be
eaten with all sorts of meat, so our Saviour should
be the subject of our meditation, consideration,
and imitation, in all our prayers and actions. His
life and death have been for this purpose disposed
and distributed into distinct points, by several
authors. Those whom I recommend to you are,
St. Bona venture, Bellintani, Bruno, Capilia, Gra-
nada, and Du Pont.

Employ an hour every day, before dinner, in
this spiritual exercise, or, if convenient, early in
the morning, when your mind will be less dis-
tracted, and more fresh after the repose of the
night ; but see that, you extend it not beyond an


NECESSITY OF PRAYER. 63

hour, except with the advice of your spiritual
director.

If you could perform this exercise in the church,
it would be the most proper and commodious
place possible, because neither father nor mother,
wife nor husband, nor any one else, could wel]
prevent you from spending one hour in the church ;
whereas, being, perhaps, under their subjection,
you could not promise yourself so much leisure
at home.

Begin all your prayers, whether mental or
vocal, with a lively sense of the presence of
God. By attending strictly to this rule, you will
soon become sensible of its salutary effects.

If you follow my advice, Philothea, you will
say your Pater, Ave, and Credo in Latin ; but at
the same time learn perfectly to comprehend the
meaning of the words in your native tongue, that,
whilst you unite with the faithful in prayer, in the
common language of the Church, you may at the
same time relish the delicious sense of those holy
and admirable prayers. Pray with your attention
fixed, and your affections excited by the sense of
the words ; pray deliberately and from your heart ;
for, believe me, only one Our Father, said with
feeling and affection, is of infinitely more worth
and value than ever so great a number run over
in haste.

The recitation of the Beads or Rosary, is a
most profitable way of praying, provided you
know how to say them properly ; to this end,
procure one of those little books which teach
the manner of reciting them. It is good also, to


64 A DEVOUT LITE.

say the litanies of our Lord Jesus, the Blessed
Virgin, and of the Saints, and other voca,
prayers, which may be found in approved man
uals. If, however, you have the gift of mental
prayer, you should always give it the prefer-
ence, so that if, either through multiplicity of
business, or some other cause, you cannot say
your vocal prayers, you must not be troubled on
that account, but rest contended with saying,
either before or after your meditation, the Pater T
Ave, and Credo.

If, whilst at vocal prayer, you feel your heart
inclined to mental prayer, refuse not the invita-
tion, but let your mind turn gently that way,
without being concerned at not finishing the
vocal prayers you purpose to say ; for the choice
you have made is more pleasing to God, anc7
more profitable to your soul ; with this exception
however, that if you are bound to say the offict
of the Church, you must fulfil your obligation.

Should it happen, through a pressure of busi-
ness, or some accidental cause, that your morning
should pass away without allowing you leisure
for the exercise of mental prayer, endeavor to
repair this loss at some remote hour after dinner ;
because by doing it immediately after, before
digestion is advanced, besides being heavy and
drowsy, you will injure your health.

But if, in the whole course of the day, you can
find no leisure for this heavenly exercise, you
may in some measure make amends by multiply-
ing your ejaculatory prayers, reading some book
sf devotion, or performing some penance, which


METHOD OF MEDITATION. 65

may prevent the ill consequences attending thia
failure ; and make a firm resolution to repair your
loss the following day.


:>XX<


CHAPTER II.

A SHORT METHOD FOR MEDITATION; AND FIRST OF THE
PRESENCE OF GOD, WHICH IS THE FIRST POINT OF THE
PREPARATION.

¥^UT perhaps, Philothea, you know not how to
^s» pray mentally, for it is a thing with which
fewT in our age are so happy as to be acquainted.
I therefore present you with the following short
and plain method, till, by custom, or reading
some of the good books which have been com-
posed on this subject, you may be mora fully
instructed.

I shall begin with the preparation, which con-
sists in placing yourself in the presence of God,
and imploring his assistance. Now, to assist you
to place yourself in the presence of God, I shall
set before you four principal means. The first
consists in a lively and attentive apprehension of
his presence, in all things and in every place ; for
there is not a place in the world in which he is not
truly present ; so that as birds, wherever they fly,
always meet with the air, so we, wherever we go,
or wherever we are, shall always find God present.

Every one acknowledges this truth ; but few
consider it with a lively attention. Blind men,


66 A DEVOUT LIFE.

who see not their prince, though present among
them, behave themselves, neverthless, with re-
spect, when they are told of his presence ; but
the fact is, because they see him not, they easily
forget that he is present, and, having forgotten
it, they still more easily lose their respect for
him. Alas, Philothea, we do not see God, who
is present with us ; and, though faith assures us
of his presence, yet, not beholding him with our
eyes, we too often forget him, and behave our-
selves as though he were at a distance from us ;
for, although we well know that he is present in
all things, yet, not reflecting on it, we act as if
we knew it not. Therefore, before prayer, we
must always excite in our souls a lively appre-
hension of the presence of God, such as David
conceived when he exclaimed : " If I ascend up
into heaven, O my God, thou art there ; if I
descend into hell, thou art there ! " — Ps. exxxviii.
And thus we should use the words of Jacob, who
having seen the sacred ladder, said : " Oh, how
terrible is this place ! Indeed the Lord is in this
place, and I knewitnot." — Gen. xxxviii., meaning
that he did not reflect on his presence, for he
could not be ignorant that God was present every-
where. When, therefore, you come to prayer,
you must say with your whole heart, and in your
heart: "O my heart! be attentive, for God is
truly here."

The second means to place yourself in his sa-
cred presence, is to reflect that God is not only
in the place in which you are, but that he is, in
a most particular manner, in your heart ; nay. in


METHOD OF MEDITATION. 67

the very centre of your spirit, which he enlivens
and animates by his divine presence, being there
as the heart of your heart, and the spirit of your
spirit ; for, as the soul, being diffused through
the whole body, is present in every part thereof,
and yet resides in a special manner in the heart,
so likewise God is present to all things, yet he
resides in a more particular manner in our spirit ;
for which reason David calls him "the God of his
heart." — Ps. lxxii. And St. Paul says, " that it is
in God we live, and we move, and we are." — Acts
xvii. In consideration, therefore, of this truth,
excite in your heart a profound reverence towards
God, who is there so intimately present.

A third means is to consider our Saviour in
his humanity looking down from heaven on all
mankind, but especially on Christians, who are
his children ; and more particularly on such as
are at prayer, whose actions and behavior he
minutely observes. This is by no means a mere
flight of the imagination, but a most certain truth ;
for although we see him not, yet it is true that he
beholds us from above. It was thus that St.
Stephen saw him at the time of his martyrdom.
So that we may truly say with the Spouse : "Be-
hold he standeth behind our wall, looking through
[he windows, looking through the lattices." —
Cantic. ii.

A fourth method consists in making use of the
imagination, by representing to ourselves our
Saviour in his sacred humanity, as if he were near
us, as we sometimes imagine a friend to be present 5
saying, "Methinks I see him," or something of the


68 A DEVOUT LIFL.

kind. But when you are before the Blessed
Sacrament, this presence is real and not imag*
inary, since we must consider the species and
appearance of bread only as a tapestry behind
which our Lord, being really present, observes us,
though we cannot actually see him. Employ then
some of these four means of placing yourself in
the presence of God before prayer, not all at once,
but one at a time, in as concise and simple a
manner as possible.


CHAPTER III.

OF INVOCATION, THE SECOND POINT OF THE PREPARATION.

¥3£EIXG sensible that you are in the presence of
A^ God, prostrate yourself before him with the
most profound reverence, acknowledging yourself
unworthy to appear before so sovereign a majesty ;
yet knowing that it is his divine will that you
should do so, implore his grace to serve and
worship him in this meditation. For this end you
may use some short and inflamed aspirations, such
as these words of David : " Cast me not, O God !
away from thy face ; and take not thy Holy Spirit
from me. Make thy face to shine upon thy ser-
vant, and I will consider the wondrous things of
thy law. Give me understanding, and I will search
thy law, and I will keep it Avith my whole heart.
t am thy servant ; give me understanding." — Ps.


SUBJECT OF MEDITATION 69

c. viii. I would also advise you to invoke your
guardian angel, as well as the holy saints who
were concerned in the mystery on which you
meditate. For example, in meditating on the
death of our Lord, you may invoke the Blessed
Virgin, St. John, St. Mary Magdalen, and the
good thief, begging that the holy affections which
they then conceived may be communicated to
you. Also, in meditating on your own death you
may invoke your good angel, who will then be
with you, beseeching him to inspire you with
proper considerations ; and so of other mysteries.


CHAPTER IV.

OF THE THIRD POINT OF PREPARATION, WHICH CONSISTS IN
PROPOSING THE SUBJECT OF THE MYSTERY CN WHICH
WE INTEND TO MEDITATE.

|7J|FTER these two general points of the prepara-
»*fc tion, there remains a third, which is not
common to every kind of meditation, and which
consists in representing to your imagination the
whole of the mystery on which you desire to
meditate, as if it really passed in your presence.
For example, if you meditate on the crucifixion of
our Lord, imagine that you are on Mount Calvary,
and that you there behold and hear all that was
done or said at the time of our Lord's passion ;
or, if you prefer it, imagine that they are crucify-


70 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ing our Saviour in the very place in which yoi:
are, in the manner described by the holy evange-
lists.

The same rule is to be observed when you
meditate on death, or hell, or any mystery in
which visible and sensible objects form a part of
the subject; but as to other mysteries, such, for
example, as relate to the greatness of God, the
excellency of virtue, the end for which we were
created, etc., which are invisible things, we cannot
make use of the imagination. We may, it is true,
use some similitude or comparison to assist us in
the consideration of these subjects, but this is
attended with some difficulty ; and my intention is
to instruct you in so plain and easy a manner, that
your mind may be at perfect ease. By means of
the imagination we confine our mind within the
mystery on which we meditate, that it may not
ramble to and fro, just as we shut up a bird in a
cage, or tie a hawk by her leash, that she may
rest on the hand. Some may perhaps tell you
that it is better to use the simple thought of faith,
and to conceive the subject in a manner altogether
mental and spiritual in the representation of these
mysteries, or else to imagine that the things take
place in your own soul. But this method is too
subtile for beginners; therefore, until it shall
please God to raise you higher, I adri^e you,
Philothea, to remain in the low valley which I
have shown you.


CONSIDERATIONS. t\


CHAPTER V.

OF CONSIDERATIONS WHICH FORM THE SECOND PART OF
MEDITATION.

JgRffFTER the act of the imagination follows
a™: medication, or the act of the understanding,
which consists in making reflections and considera-
tions, in order to raise up our affections to God
and heavenly things. Hence meditation must not
be confounded with study or other thoughts or
reflections which have not the love of God or our
spiritual welfare for their object ; but something
else, as, for example, to acquire learning and
knowledge, to write or dispute. Having, then, as
I have already said, confined your mind within the
limits of the subject on which you desire to medi-
tate, either by means of the imagination, if the
matter be sensible, or otherwise by a simple
proposal of it, begin to form considerations on it
according to the models I have proposed to you
in the foregoing meditations. Should you relish
the fruit of any one of them, occupy yourself
without going further, like the bees, who never
quit the flower so long as they can extract any
honey from it. But if, upon trial, you succeed
not with one consideration, according to youi
wishes, proceed to another, calmly, tranquilly,
without hurrying yourself or fatiguing your mind.


VA A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER VI.

OF AFFECTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS, THE THIRD PART OF-

MEDITATION.

JWf EDITATIOX produces pious motions in the
*X4: wjH5 or affective part of our soul, such as
the love of God and our neighbor ; a desire of
heaven and eternal glory ; zeal for the salvation
of souls; imitation of the life of our Lord ; com-
passion, admiration, joy ; the fear of God's dis-
pleasure, of judgment, and of hell; hatred of sin,
confidence in the goodness and mercy of God,
and confusion for the sins of our past life. In
these affections our hearts should expand as much
as possible. Tou will be greatly assisted in this
part of meditation by reading the preface to the
first volume of the meditations of Doin Andrew
Capilia, where he shows the manner of forming
these affections, as Father Arias does more at
large in his second part of his treatise on prayer.
Yet you must not, however, Philothea, dwell
upon these general reflections without determining
to reduce them to special and particular resolutions.
For example : the first word that our Lord spoke
on the cross will doubtless excite in your soul a
desire to pardon and love your enemies. But
this will avail you little if you add not to the
desire a practical resolution saying: "Well, then,
1 will not hereafter be offended at what this or
that person may say of me, nor resent any affront


A SPIRITUAL. <VOSEGA\. fh

he may offer me ; but, on the contrary, I will
embrace every opportunity to gain his affection,
and to appease him." By this means, Philothea,
you will correct your faults in a short time j
whereas by affections only, your amendment will
be but slow, and attended with great difficulty.


CHAPTER VII.

OF THE CONCLUSION AND SPIRITUAL NOSEGAY.

^,AST of all, we must conclude our meditation
> by forming three acts, which must be done
frith the utmost humility. The first is to return
thanks to God for the good affections and resolu-
tions with which he has inspired us, and for his
goodness and mercy, which we have discovered
in the mystery of the meditation. The second is
to offer our affections and resolutions to his good-
ness and mercy, in union with the death, the
blood, and the virtues of his Divine Son. The
third is to conjure God to communicate to us the
graces and virtues of his Son, and to bless our
affections and resolutions, that we may faithfully
reduce them to practice. T\ e then pray for the
Church, our pastors, friends, and others, im-
ploring for that end the intercession of the
Blessed Virgin, and of the angels and saints;
and, lastly, as I have already observed, we con-
clude by saying Our Father, and Hail Mary.


74 A DEVOUT LIFE.

which are the general and necessary prayers of
all the faithful.

Besides all this, as I have already told you,
you must gather a little nosegay of devotion.
One who has been walking in a beautiful garden,
departs not willingly without gathering a few
flowers to smell during the remainder of the day ;
thus ought we, when our soul has been entertain-
ing itself by meditating on some mystery, to
select one, or two, or three of those points in
which we have found most relish, and which are
most proper for our advancement, to think fre-
quently on them, and smell them as it were
spiritually during the course of the day. This
is to be done in the place in which we have been
meditating, either remaining there in silence, or
walking by ourselves for some time after.


CHAPTER VIII.

CEKTAIN PROFITABLE ADVICES ON THE SUBJECT OF MEDITmTIOK

^pBOVE all things, Philothea, when you rise
'£*£ from meditation, remember the resolutions
you have taken, and, as the occasion offers, care-
fully reduce them to practice that very day.
This is the great fruit of meditation, without
which it is not only unprofitable, but frequently
hurtful ; for virtues meditated upon, and not
practised, often miff up the spirit, and make us


SUBJECT OF MEDITATION. 75

imagine that we really are such as we resolve
to be, which doubtless is true, when our resolu-
tions are lively and solid ; now they are not so,
but, on the contrary, vain and dangerous when
they are not reduced to practice. We mast,
therefore, by all means, seek every occasion, little
or great, of putting them in execution. For
example : if I have resolved by mildness to gain
the hearts of such as offend me, I will seek this
very day an opportunity to meet them, and
salute them kindly ; or, if I should not meet them,
at least to speak well of them, and pray to God
in their behalf.

After prayer, be careful not to agitate your
heart, lest you spill the precious balm it has re-
ceived. My meaning is, that you must, for some
time, if possible, remain in silence, and gently
remove your heart from prayer to your other
employments ; retaining, as long as you can, a
feeling of the affections which you have con-
ceived. A man who has received some precious
liquor in a vase of porcelain, in carrying it
home walks gently, not looking aside, but gen-
erally before him, for fear of stumbling, and
sometimes upon his dish, for fear of spilling the
liquor. Thus ought you to act when you linish
your meditation ; suffer nothing to distract you,
but look forward with caution ; or, to speak more
plainly, should you meet with any one with whom
you are obliged to enter into conversation, there
is no other remedy but to watch over your heart,
that as little of the liquor of holy prayer as possi-
ble may be, spilt on the occasion.


/6 A DEVOUT LIFE.

You must even accustom yourself to know
how to pass from prayer to those occupations
which your state of life lawfully requires, though
ever so foreign from the affections which you have
received in prayer. Thus the lawyer must learn
to pass from prayer to pleading ; the merchant, to
commerce ; and the married woman, to the care of
her family, with so much ease and tranquillity that
their minds may not be disturbed ; for, since prayeL
and the duties of your state of life are both in con-
formity with the will of God, you must learn to
pass from the one to the other in the spirit of
humility and devotion.

You must also know that it may sometimes
happen that immediately after the preparation,
you will feel your affections moved towards God.
In this case, Philothea, you must yield to the
attraction, and cease to follow the method I have
before given ; for, although, generally speaking,
consideration precedes affections and resolutions,
vet when the Holy Ghost gives you the latter
before the former, you must not then seek the
former, since it is used for no other purpose than
to excite the latter. In a word, whenever affec-
tions present themselves, we must expand our
hearts to make room for them, whether they
jome before or after considerations ; and, although
I have placed them after the considerations, I have
done so merely to distinguish more plainly the parts
of prayer, for otherwise it is a general rule never
to restrain the affections, but to let them have their
free course whenever they present themselves.
This must be observed even with respect to


SPIRITUAL DRYNESS. 77

thanksgiving, oblation, and petition, which may
likewise be used in the midst of the considera-
tions, for they must be restrained no more than
the other affections ; though afterwards, for the
conclusion of the meditation, they must be re-
peated. But as for resolutions, they are always
to be made after the affections, and immediately
before the conclusion of the whole meditation ;
because, as in these we represent to ourselves par-
ticular and familiar objects, they would put us in
danger of distractions should we mingle them
with our affections.

AVhile we are forming our affections and resolu-
tions it is advisable to use colloquies, and to speak,
sometimes to our Lord, sometimes to the angels
and the persons represented in the mysteries ; to
the saints, to ourselves, to our own heart, to
sinners, and even to insensible creatures ; after the
example of David in his psalms, and of other
saints in their prayers and meditations.


CHAPTER IX.

OF THE DRYNESS WHICH WE SOMETIMES EXPERIENCE !M

MEDITATION.

^JHOULD it happen, Pliilothea, that you feel
*£* no relish or comfort in meditation, I conjure
you not to disturb yourself on that account ; but
sometimes open the door of your heart to vocaJ


78 A DEVOUT LIFE.

prayer, complain of yourself to oar Lord, confess
your un worthiness, and beseech him to assist you.
Kiss your crucifix if you have it at hand, saying to
him those words of Jacob, " I will not let thee go,
O Lord ! till thou hast given me thy blessing," or
ihose of the Cananean woman, " Yea, Lord ! I am a
dog ; but yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall
from their master's table."

At other times, take up some spiritual book, and
read it with attention till your affections are moved,
or endeavor to excite fervor in your heart by some
posture of exterior devotion, such as prostrating
yourself on the ground, crossing your hands before
your breast, or embracing a crucifix ; provided you
be alone or in some private place. But if, after
all, you should receive no comfort, be not dis-
turbed, no matter how excessive the dryness may
be ; but continue to remain in a devout posture in
the presence of God. How many courtiers enter
a hundred times a year into the prince's presence-
chamber without hopes of speaking to him, but
merely to be seen by him, and to pay him their
homage. So ought we, my dear Philothea, to
come to holy prayer, purely and merely to pay our
homage, and testify our fidelity to God. Should
it please his divine Majesty to speak to us and
entertain himself with us by his holy inspirations
and interior consolations, it would certainly be an
honor above our merits, and the source of the
sweetest consolation ; but should it not please him
to grant us this favor, but leave us without taking
any more notice of us than as if we were not in his
presence, we must not therefore depart, but con-


ON THE MORNING EXERCISE. 79

tinue with respect mid devotion in presence of his
adorable Majesty. Observing our diligence, our
patience, and perseverance, he will, when we come
again before him, favor us with his consolations,
and make us experience the sweetness of his holy
prayer. Yet, if he should not do so, let us assure
ourselves, Philothea. that we are highly honored
by being permitted to appear in his presence.


CHAPTER X.

OF THE MORNING EXERCISE.

RESIDES your daily meditation, and the vocal
prayers which you ought to say once every
clay, there are live other shorter exercises which
are, as it were, branches of the principal prayer;
the first is morning prayer, intended as a general
preparation to all the actions of the clay, which
may be made in the following manner.

1. Adore God most profoundly, and return him
thanks for having preserved you from the clangers
of the night , and if, during the course of it, you
nave committed any sin, implore his pardon.

2. Consider that the present day is given you
in order that you may gain the future day of eter-
nity ; make a firm purpose, therefore, to employ
it well with this intention.

3. Foresee in what business or conversation you
will probably be engaged ; what opportunities you


80 A DEVOUT LIFE.

will have to serve God ; to what temptations of
offending him you will be exposed, either by
anger, by vanity, or any other irregularity, and
prepare yourself by a linn resolution to make the
best use of those means which shall be offered you
to serve God, and advance in devotion ; as also, on
the other hand, dispose yourself carefully to avoid,
resist, and overcome whatever may present itself
that is prejudicial to your salvation and the glory
of God. Now, it is not sufficient to make this
resolution unless you also prepare the means of
reducing it to practice. For example : if I fore-
see that I am to treat of any business with one that
is passionate, and easily provoked to anger, T will
not only resolve to refrain from giving him any
offence, but will also prepare words of meekness
to prevent his anger, or use the assistance of some
person that may keep him in temper. If 1 foresee
that I shall have an opportunity of visiting some
sick person, I will determine the hour of the visit,
the comforts and assistances I may afford him ; and
so of the rest.

4. This done, humble yourself in the presence
of God, acknowledging that, of yourself, you are
incapable of executing your resolutions, either to
avoid evil, or to do good ; and, as if you held your
heart in your hands, offer it, together with all your
good designs, fo his divine Majesty, beseeching
him to take it under his protection, and so to
strengthen it that it may proceed prosperously in
his service, using these or the like words interiorly :
"Behold, O Lord! this poor, miserable heart of
mine, which, through thy goodness, has conceived


ON THE EVENING EXERCISE. 81

many good affections, but which, alas ! is of itself
so weak and wretched, that it is incapable of exe-
cuting* the good which it desires, unless thou im-
part to it thy heavenly blessing, which for this end
I humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father ! through
the merits of the passion of thy Son, to whose honor
I consecrate this day, and all the remaining clays
of my life." Then invoke the Blessed Virgin,
your good angel, and the saints, that they may aU
assist you by their intercession.

But all these spiritual acts must be made briefly
and fervently, and before you depart from your
chamber, if it be possible, that by means of this
prayer, all that you are to do throughout the
whole day may be sanctified by the blessing of
God ; and I beg of you, Philothea, never to omit
this exercise.


>>*c


CHAPTER XI.


OF THE EVENING EXERCISE, AND THE EXAMINATION OF
CONSCIENCE.


£


|S before dinner you have made a spiritual re-
<a^l past by means of meditation, so before supper,
you must make a devout spiritual collation. Take
then some little opportunity, before supper, to
prostrate yourself before God, and recollect your-
self in the presence of Jesus Christ crucified,
whom you may represent to yourself by a single
consideration, and an interior glance of the eye,


82 A DEVOUT LIFE.

and rekindle in your heart the fire of }rour morning
meditation by some lively aspirations, some acts
of humility and love which you will make towards
this divine Saviour of your soul ; or else, by re-
peating the points of your morning meditation
which affected you most, or by exciting yourself
up to devotion by some new spiritual subject, as
you may prefer.

As to the examination of conscience, which must
be always made before you retire to rest, every one
knows how it is to be performed. 1 . We give thanks
to God for having preserved us during the day
past. 2. We examine how wc have behaved our-
selves throughout the whole course of it ; and to
do this more easily, we may consider where we
have been, with whom, and in what business we
have been employed. 3. If we find that we have
done any good, we must thank God for it ; or if,
on the other hand, we have done any evil, whether
in thought, word, or deed, we must ask pardon of
his divine Majesty, firmly resolving to confess it
at the first opportunity;, and to avoid it for the
future. 4. We afterwards recommend to the pro-
tection of divine Providence our soul and body, the
Holy Church, together with our parents and
friends ; and, finally, we beg the Blessed Virgin,
our angel guardian, and all the saints, to watch
over us and pray for us ; and thus, with the bless-
ing of God, we o;o to take that rest which his will

O ' o

has appointed for us.

This exercise, as well as that of the morning,
must never be forgotten ; since by that you open
the windows of your soul to the Sun of Justice :


ON SPIRITUAL RECOLLECTION. 83

and by this you close them against the darkness
of hell.

CHAPTER XII.

OF SPIRITUAL RECOLLECTION.

^T is to this point, my dear Philothea, that I
^ wish to draw your particular attention, since
in it consists one of the most assured means of
your spiritual advancement.

Eecollect as often as you can, in the course of
the day, by any of the four ways I have marked
out for you, that you stand in the presence of God ;
observe what he does, and what you are doing,
and you shall find his eyes perpetually fixed upon
you with an inconceivable love. Then say to
him : tf O my God ! why do I not turn my eyes
towards thee, as thou always lookest on me? Why
dost thou think incessantly on me, O my Lord?
and why do I so seldom think on thee? Where
are we, O my soul ? Our true place of rest is God,
and where do we find ourselves ? "

As birds have their nests on trees, to which
they occasionally retire, and the deer, bushes
and thickets, in which they conceal themselves and
enjoy the cool shade in the heat of summer, sc
shall we, Philothea, choose some place every day,
either on Mount Calvary, or in the wounds of oui
Lord, or in some other place near him, as a retreat
to which we may occasionally retire to refresh


84 A DEVOUT LIFE.

and recreate ourselves amidst our exterior occupa
tions ; and there, as in a stronghold, defend our-
selves against temptations. Blessed is he that
can say with truth to our Lord : " Thou art my
place of strength and my refuge, my defence from
storms, and my shadow from the heat." — Ps. lxx.
3 ; Isai. xxv. 4.

Remember then, Phiiothea, to retire occasion-
ally into the solitude of your heart while you are
outwardly engaged in business or conversation.
This mental solitude cannot be prevented by the
multitude of those who surround you ; for, as they
are not about your heart, but your body, your
heart may remain in the presence of God alone.
This was the exercise which the holy King David
practised amidst his various occupations, as he
testifies in the following, as well as in several
other places of his psalms : "O Lord ! as for me,
I am always with thee. I beheld the Lord always
before me, 1 have lifted up my eyes to thee, O my
God ! who dwellest in heaven. My eyes are
always toward God." And indeed our occupa-
tions are seldom so serious as to prevent us from
withdrawing our heart occasionally from them, in
order to retire into this divine solitude.

When the parents of St. Catharine of Sienna
had deprived her of the opportunity of a place,
and of leisure to pray and meditate, our Lord
directed her, by his inspirations, to make a little
interior oratory within her soul, into which, retir-
ing mentally, she might, amidst her exterior
occupations, enjoy this holy spiritual solitude ;
and when the world afterwards assaulted her, she


ON SPIRITUAL RECOLLECTION. 85

received no inconvenience from it, because, as she
said, she had shut herself up in her interior closet,
where she comforted herself Avith her heavenly
Spouse. From her own experience of the utility
of this exercise, she afterwards counselled her
spiritual children to practise it.

Withdraw, then, your thoughts, from time to
time, into your heart, where, separated from all
men, you may familiarly treat with God on the
affairs of your soul. Say with David : " I watched
and am become like a pelican of the wilderness. I
am like a night raven in the house. I have
watched, and am become as a sparrow, all alone
on the house-top." — Ps. cl. These words not only
inform us that this great king spent some solitary
hours in the contemplation of spiritual things, but
they also point out, in a mystical sense, three
excellent retreats or hermitages, in which we may
imitate the solitude of our Saviour, who on Mount
Calvary was likened to the pelican of the wilder-
ness, which nourishes and gives life to her young
ones with her own blood ; in his nativity, in a
desolate stable, to the night raven in a ruinous
building, mourning and weeping for our offences
and sins ; and, at his accession, to the sparrow
flying up to heaven, which is, as it were, the
house-top of the world. In these three solitudes
we may make our spiritual retreats, even amidst
the turmoils of our exterior employments.
Blessed Elzear, Count of Arian in Provence, hav-
ing been long absent from his devout and chaste
Delphina, she sent an express to him to inquire
after his health, by whom he returned this answer ?


86 A DEVOUT LIFE.

'fl am very well, my dear spouse; but if you
desire to see me, seek me in the wound of the side
of our sweet Saviour ; for, as it is there only that
I dwell, it is there that you shall find me ; if you
seek me elsewhere, you will search in vain." This
was a Christian nobleman indeed.


CHAPTER XIII.

OF ASPIRATIONS, EJACULATORY PRAYERS, AND GOOD THOUGHTS

^jKjjjfE retire into God because we aspire to him ;
e)J0P and we aspire to him that we may retire
into him, so that aspirations to God, and spiritual
retirement are the mutual support of each other,
and both proceed from the same source, viz., de-
vout and pious thoughts.

Make, then, Philothea, frequent aspirations to
God by short but ardent motions of your heart ;
admire his beauty ; implore his assistance ; cast
yourself in spirit at the foot of the cross ; adore
his goodness ; converse with him frequently on
the affairs of your salvation ; present your soul to
him a thousand times a day : contemplate his
clemency and his sweetness ; stretch out your
hand to him, as a little child to his father, that he
may conduct you ; place him in your bosom, like
a fragrant nosegay ; plant him in your soul, like a
standard, and make a thousand different motions
of your heart, to enkindle and excite within your-


ASPIRATIONS . 87

self a passionate and tender affection for your
divine Spouse. Ejaculatory prayer was stren-
uously recommended by the great St. Austin to
the devout Lady Proba. Philothea, our mind, by
habituating itself thus privately to the company
and familiarity of our God, will be altogether per-
fumed with his perfections. Now there is no
difficulty in this exercise, as it may be intermixed
with our other occupations, without any inconven-
ience whatever, since in these spiritual and interior
aspirations we only make short deviations, which,
instead of preventing, rather assist us in the pur-
suit of the object which we have in view. The
pilgrim, though he stops to take a little wine to
refresh himself, interrupts not his journey by
doing so, but, on the contrary, acquires new
strength to finish it with more ease and expedition,
resting onlv that he may afterwards proceed the
faster.

Many have collected a store of vocal aspirations,
which may be very profitable ; but I would advise
you not to confine yourself to any set form of
words, but to pronounce, either with your heart
or mouth, such as love, without any study, shall
suggest to you ; for it will furnish you with as
many as you can desire. It is true there are cer-
tain words which have a peculiar force to satisfy
the heart in this respect. Such as the aspirations
interspersed so copiously throughout the Psalms
of David ; the frequent invocations of the name of
Jesus ; the ejaculations of love expressed in the
Canticles, etc. Spiritual songs will also answer
the same purpose whe^ gnrg with attention.


88 A DEVOUT LIFE.

They who love with a human and natural affec-
tion have their thoughts and hearts incessantly
engaged by the object of their passion, and their
mouth ever employed in its praise. When absent,
they lose no opportunity of testifying their affec-
tion by letters, and meet not a tree, on the bark
of which they do not inscribe the mime of their
beloved. Thus, such as truly love God can never
cease to think on him, breathe for him, aspire to
him, and speak of him ; and, were it possible, they
would engrave the sacred name of Jesus on the
breasts of all mankind.

To this all things invite them, as there is no
creature that does not declare to them the praises'
of their beloved ; and as St. Austin says, aftei
St. Anthony, everything in the world addressee
them in a silent, yet very intelligible language, in
favor of their love. All things excite them to
good thoughts, which give birth to many animated
motions and aspirations of the soul t^ God. Be-
hold some examples.

St. Gregory Nazianzen, walking on the sea-
shore, observed how the waves, advancing upon
the beach, left behind them shells and little peri-
winkles, stalks of weeds, small oysters, and the
like, which the sea had cast upon the shore, and
then, returning with other waves, tcok part of them
back, and swallowed them up again, whilst the
adjoining rocks continued firm and immovable,
(hough the billows beat against them with so much
violence. Upon which he made this salutary re-
flection : that feeble souls, like shells and stalks of
weeds, surfer themselves to b« borne away, some


ASPIRATIONS. 88

times by affliction, and at other times by consola-
tion, at the mercy of the inconstant billows of
fortune ; but that courageous souls continue firm
and unmoved under all kinds of storms : and from
this thought he pi oceeded to those aspirations of
David (Ps. lxviii) : tf Save me, O God! for the
waters are come i-i wen unto my soul. O Lord !
deliver me out ol these deep waters ; I am come
into the depth of the sea, and a tempest hath
overwhelmed me : " for at that time he was iu
affliction for the unhappy usurpation of his bish-
opric attempted by Maxmius.

St. Fulgent uvi, bishop of Ruspa, being present
at a general assembly of the Roman nobility, when
Theodoric, king of the Goths, made an oration to
them, and beholding the splendor of so many great
lords, ranked each according to his quality, ex-
claimed : " O God ! how glorious and beautiful
must the heavenly Jerusalem be, since earthly
Rome appears in so much pomp ! for, if in this
world the lovers of vanity be permitted to shine
so bright, what must that glory be which is re-
served in the next world for the lovers and con-
templators of verity ! "

St. Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, by whose
birth on1* i.iountains have been highly honored,
was admirable in the application of good thoughts.
As this holy prelate was proceeding on a journey,
a hare pursued by hounds ran under his horse, as
to a place of refuge, suggested by the imminent
danger of death ; whilst the hounds, barking around,
durst not attempt to violate the sanctuary to which
their prey had taken recourse. A sight so verv


90 A DEVOUT LIFE.

extraordinary made the whole company burst inU
a fit of laughter ; but the saint, weeping and sigh-
ing, cried out : " Alas ! you laugh, but the poor
beast does not laugh ; the enemies of the soul,
after hunting and driving her on, through various
turnings and windings, into every kind of sin, lie
in wait for her at the narrow passage of death, to
catch and devour her ; but she, being terrified,
looks for succor and refuge on every side ; and if
she find none, her enemies mock and deride her."
When the saint had thus spoken, he rode on sigh*
ing.

Constantine the Great wrote with respect to St.
Anthony ; at which the religious about him being
greatly surprised, "Why," said he "are you as-
tonished that a king should write to a man ? Be
astonished rather that the eternal God has written
his law to mortal men ; nay, more, has spoken to
then; by word of mouth, in the person of his Son."

St, Francis seeing a sheep alone amidst a Mock
of goats, "Observe," said he to his companion,
"the poor sheep, how mild it is amidst the goats ;
our blessed Lord walked thus meekly and humbly
anions the Pharisees." At another time, seeing a
lamb devoured by a hog, "Ah! little lamb," said
he, weeping, " in how lively a manner dost thou
represent the death of my Saviour ! "

The illustrious St. Francis Borgia, while yet
duke of Gandia, frequently recreated himself in
hawking ; during this amusement he was accus-
tomed to make a thousand devout reflections. "I
admired," said he, afterwards, "how the falcons
come to hand, suffer themselves to be hooded and


ASPIRATIONS. 91

to be tied to the perch ; and that men are so rebel-
!ious to the voice of God."

The great St. Basil said, that the rose in the
midst of thorns makes this remonstrance to men :
"That which is most agreeable in this world, O ye
mortals ! is mingled with sorrow : nothing here is
pure ; regret always follows mirth ; widowhood,
marriage ; care, fruitfulness ; and ignominy, glory.
Expense follows honor : loathing comes after de-
light ; and sickness after health. The rose is a fair
flower," said this holy man, "yet it makes me
sorrowful, reminding me of my sin, for which the
earth has been condemned to bring forth thorns."

A devout soul, standing over a brook on a very-
clear night, and seeing the heavens and stars
therein represented exclaimed, " O my God ! these
very stars which I now behold shall be one day
beneath my feet, when thou shalt have lodged me
in thy celestial tabernacles ; and as the stars of
heaven are here represented, even so are the men
of this earth represented in the living fountain of
divine charity." Another, seeing a river flowing
swiftly along, cried out, "My soul shall never be
at rest, till she be swallowed up in the sea of
the divinity, her original source." St. Francisca,
contemplating a pleasant brook, upon the bank of
which she was kneeling at her prayers, being rapt
into an ecstasy, often repeated these words, "The
grace of my God flows thus gently and sweetly,
like this little stream." Another, looking on the
trees in bloom, sighed and said, "Ah! why am
I alone without blossom in the garden of the
Church ! " Another, seeing little chickens gath-


92 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ered together under the hen said, "Preserve us,
O Lord ! continually under the shadow of thy
wings." Another, looking upon the flower called
Heliotropium, which turns to the sun, "When
shall the time come," said he, " O my God ! that
my soul shall faithfully follow the attractions of
Thy goodness?" And seeing the flowers called
pansies, which are beautiful, but without fra-
grance, " Ah ! " said he, " such are my conceptions,
fair in appearance, but of no effect, producing
nothing."

Behold, Philothea, how one may extract good
thoughts and holy aspirations from everything
that presents itself amidst the variety of this
mortal life ! Unhappy they who withdraw the
creatures from their Creator, to make them the
instrument of sin ; and thrice happy they that
turn the creatures to the glory of their Creator,
and employ them to the honor of his sovereign
Majesty. As St. Gregory Nazianzen says, "I am
wont to refer all things to my spiritual profit."
Read the devout epitaph of St. Paula, composed
by St. Jerome. How agreeable to behold it inter-
spersed with those aspirations and holy thoughts,
which she was accustomed to draw from occur-
rences of every nature !

Now, as the great work of devotion consists in
the exercise of spiritual recollection and ejacula-
tory prayers, the want of all other prayers may
be supplied by them ; but the loss of these can
scarcely be repaired by any other means. With-
out them we cannot lead a good, active life, much
less a contemplative one. Without them repose


^OLY SACRIFICE OF THE MASS. 93

would be but idleness and labor vexation. Where-
fore, I conjure you to embrace this, exercise youi
whole heart, without ever desisting from its prac-
tice.


CHAPTER XIV.

OF THE HOLY SACRIFICE OF MASS, AND HOW WE OUGHT TO
HEAR IT.

pflTHERTO I have said nothing of the most
3™ holy, sacred, and august sacrament and sacri-
fice of the Mass ; the centre of the Christian re-
ligion, the heart of devotion, and the soul of piety ;
a mystery so ineffable as to comprise within itself
the abyss of divine charity ; a mystery in which
God communicates himself really to us, and in a
special manner replenishes our souls with spiritual
graces and favors.

2. When prayer, O Philothea ! is united to
this divine sacrifice, it becomes so unspeakably
efficacious as to cause the soul to overflow, as it
were, with heaA'enly consolations. Here she re-
clines upon her well-beloved, who fills her with
so much spiritual sweetness, that she resembles,
as it is said in the canticles, a pillar of smoke,
proceeding from a lire of aromatic wood, from
myrrh and frankincense, and from all the powders
of the perfumer.

3. Endeavor, therefore, to assist at Mass every
day, that you may jointly, with the priest, offer
up the ho'y sacritice of your Redeemer, to God


94 A DEVOUT LIFE.

his Father, for yourself and the whole Church.
"The angels," says St. John Chrysostom, "always
attend in great numbers to honor this adorable
mystery"; and Ave, by associating ourselves to
them, with one and the same intention, cannot
but receive many favorable influences from so
holy a society. The choirs of the Church tri-
umphant and those of the Church militant unite
themselves to our Lord in this divine action, that
with him, in him, and through him, they may
ravish the heart of God the Father, and make his
mercy all our own. Oh, what a happiness it is to
a soul devoutly to contribute her affections for
obtaining so precious and desirable a treasure !

4. Should some indispensable business prevent
you from assisting in person at the celebration
of this sovereign sacrifice, endeavor at least to
assist at it by a spiritual presence, uniting your
intention with that of all the faithful ; and using
the same interior acts of devotion in your closet
that you would use in some church represented to
your imagination.

5. Now, to hear Mass in a proper manner,
either really or mentally, 1. From the begin-
ning, till the priest goes up to the altar, make
with him your preparation, which consists in
placing yourself in the presence of God, acknowl-
edging your unworthiness and begging pardon
for your sins. 2. From the time he goes up to
the altar till the Gospel, consider the birth and
the life of our Lord, by a simple and generai
consideration. 3. From the Gospel till after the
Creed, consider the preaching of our Saviour,


HOLY SACRIFICE OF THE MASS. 95

and protest that you resolve to live and die in
the faith and obedience of his holy word, and in
the communion of the holy Catholic Church.
From the Creed to the Pater Foster apply your
heart to the mysteries of the passion and death
of our Redeemer , essentially represented in this
holy sacrifice, and which, with the priest and
the rest of the people, you must offer to the
honor of God the Father, an . for your salvation.
5. From the Pater JSToster to the Communion,
strive to excite a thousanc desires in your heart,
ardently wishing to he forever united to our Sav-
iour by everlasting love.

6. From the Communion till the end, return
thanks to Jesus Christ for his incarnation, life,
passion, and death : as well as for the love he tes-
tifies to us in this holy sacrifice ; conjuring him to
be forever merciful to you ; to your parents and
friends, and to the whole Church ; and finally, hum-
bling yourself with your whole heart, receive de-
voutly the benediction which our Lord gives you
through the ministry of his officer, the officiating
priest.

But should you prefer, during Mass, to meditate
on the mystery you proposed for your consideration
on that day, it is not necessary that you should di-
vert your thoughts to make all these particular
acts ; but, at the beginning, direct your intention
to adore, and offer up this holy sacrifice, by the
exercise of your meditations and prayer ; for in all
meditations the aforesaid acts may be found either
expressly or tacitly and equivalently.


96 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER XV.

OF VESPERS. AND OTHER PUBLIC EXERCISES

^^ESIDES hearing Mass on Sundays and holidays,
^^^ you ought also, Philothea, to be present a'
Vespers and the other public offices of the Church
as far as your convenience will permit. For, a?
these days are dedicated to God, we ought to per-
form more acts to his honor and glory on them than
on other days. By this means you will experience
the sweetness of devotion, as St. Austin did, who
testifies in his confessions, that hearing the divine
office in the beginning of his conversion, his heart
melted into tenderness, and his eyes into tears of
piety. And, indeed, to speak once for all, there
is always more benefit and comfort to be derived
from the public offices of the Church than from
private devotions, God having ordained that com-
munion of prayers should always have the prefer-
ence.

Enter, then, willingly into the confraternities of
the place in which you reside, and especially those
whose exercises are most productive of fruit and
edification, as in so doing you practise a sort of
obedience acceptable to God ; for, although these
confraternities are not commanded, they are nev-
ertheless recommended by the Church, which, to
testify her approbation of them, grants indulgences
and other privileges to such as enter them. Be-
sides, it is always very laudable to concur and co-


IX VOCATION OF SAINTS. 97

jperate with many in their good designs ; for,
although we might perform as good exercises alone
as in the company of a confraternity, and perhaps
take more pleasure in performing them in private,
yet God is more glorified by the union and contri-
bution we make of our good works with those of
our brethren and neighbors.

I say the same of all kinds of public prayers and
devotions, which we should countenance as much
as possible with our good example, for the edifi-
cation of our neighbor, and our affection for the
glory of God and the common intention.


CHAPTER XVI.

OF THE HONOR AND INVOCATION OF SAINTS.

^EINCE God often sends us inspirations by his
^^ angels, we also ought frequently to send back
our inspirations to him by the same messengers.
The holy souls of the deceased, who dwell in heaven
with the angels, and, as our Saviour says, are equal
and like to the angels, Luke xv. 36, do also the
same office of inspiring us, and interceding for us
by their holy prayers. O my Philothea ! let us
then join our hearts with these heavenly spirits,
and happy souls ; and as the young nightingales
learn to sing in company of the old, so, by the holy
association we make with the saints, we shall learn
to pray and to sing the divine praises in a much


98 A DEVOUT LIFE.

better manner. "I will sing praises to thee, O
Lord," says David, "in the sight of the angels."
Psalms exxxvii. 2.

Honor, reverence, love, and respect in a special
manner, the sacred and glorious Virgin Mary, she
being the mother of our sovereign Lord, and con-
sequently our mother. Let us run, then, to her,
and, as her little children, cast ourselves into her
bosom with a perfect confidence, at all times, and
in all occurrences. Let us call upon this dear
Mother ; let us invoke her motherly love ; and, en-
deavoring to imitate her virtues, let us bear a true
filial affection towards her.

Make yourself familiar with the angels, and be-
hold them frequently in spirit ; for, without being
seen, they are at present with you. Always bear a
particular love and reverence towards the angel of
the diocese wherein you dwell, and of the persons
with whom you live ; but especially towards your
own angel guardian. Address yourself often to
them, honor and praise them, and make use of
their assistance and succor in all your affairs, spir-
itual or temporal, that they may cooperate with
your intentions.

The great Peter Faber, the first priest, the first
preacher, and the first proposer of divinity in the
Holy Society of Jesus, and the companion of St.
Ignatius, its founder, returning from Germany,
where he had done great service to the glory of
our Lord, and travelling through this diocese, the
place of his birth, related, that having passed
through many heretical places, he had received in-
numerable consolations from the guardian angels


HEARING THE WORD OF GOD. 99

of the several parishes, and that on repeated occa-
sions he had received the most sensible and con-
vincing proofs of their protection. Sometimes
they preserved him from the ambush of his enemies,
at other times they rendered several souls more
mild, and tractable to receive from him the doctrine
of salvation : this he related with so much earnest-
ness, that a gentlewoman then very young, who
heard it from his own mouth, related it but four
years ago, that is to say, about threescore year?
after he had told it, with an extraordinary feeling.
I had the consolation last year to consecrate an
altar on the spot where God was pleased this
blessed man should be born, in a little village
called Yilaret, amidst our most craggy mountains.
Choose some particular saint or saints, whose
lives may please you most, and whom you can
best imitate, and in whose intercession you may
have a particular confidence. The saint, whose
name you bear, is already assigned you, from your
baptism.


CHAPTER XVII.

HOW WE OUGHT TO HEAR AND READ THE WORD OF GOD.

T|^ISTEN with devotion to the word of God,
AA whether you hear it in familiar conversation,
with your spiritual friends, or in a sermon. Make
all the profit of it you possibly can, and suffer it
not to fall to the ground, but receive it into your


100 A DEVOUT LIFE.

heart as a precious balm ; imitating the most hoiv
Virgin, who carefully preserved in her heart all
the words which were spoken in praise of her Son.
Remember that our Lord gathers up the words we
speak to him in our prayers, according as we
gather up those he speaketh to us by preaching.
Always have at hand some approved book of
devotion ; such as the spiritual works of St. Bona-
venture, of Gerson, of Denis, the Carthusian, oi
Louis Blosius, of Granada, of Stella, of Arias, of
Pihelle, of Dupont, of Avilla, the Spiritual Com-
bat, St. Austin's Confessions, St. Jerome's Epis-
tles, etc., etc., and read a little in them with as
much devotion, every day, as if you were read-
ing a letter, which those saints had sent you from
heaven to show you the way, and encourage you
to come thither. Read, also, the histories and lives
of the saints, in which, as in a looking-glass, you
may behold the portraiture of a Christian life, and
accommodate their actions to your state of life ;
for, although several actions of the saints cannot
absolutely be imitated by such as live in the midst
of the world, yet they may, in some degree, be
followed. For example, we may imitate the soli-
tude of St. Paul, the first hermit, in our spiritual
and real retirements, of which we shall hereafter
speak, and have already spoken; the extreme
poverty of St. Francis, by the practices of poverty,
and so of the rest. It is true, there are some of
their histories that give more light for the con-
duct of our lives than others, such as the life of
the blessed mother Teresa, the lives of the first
Jesuits, that of St. Charles Borromeus, archbishop


RECEIVING INSPIRATIONS. 101

of Milan; of St. Lewis; of St. Bernard; the
Chronicles of St. Francis ; and several others.

There are others again, which contain more
matter of admiration than of imitation ; as the life
of St. Mary of Egypt, of St. Simeon Stylites, of
the two St. Catharines of Sienna and of Genoa, of
St. Angela, and the like ; which, nevertheless, fail
dot, in general, to give us a great relish for the
love of God.

CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW WE OUGHT TO RECEIVE INSPIRATIONS,

dlPP^ inspirations are meant all those interior at-
^* tractions, motions, reproaches and remorses,
lights and conceptions, which God excites in us,
preventing our hearts with his blessings, through
his fatherly care and love, in order to awaken,
stimulate, urge, and attract us to the practice of
every virtue ; to heavenly love ; to good resolu-
tions ; and, in a word, to everything that may help
us on our way to eternal happiness. This is what
the Spouse calls knocking at the door, and speak-
ing to the heart of his spouse ; awaking her when
she sleeps ; calling after her when she is absent ; in-
viting her to gather apples and flowers in his
garden : to sing and to cause her sweet voice to
sound in his ears.

That you may the more perfectly comprehend
me, I must use a comparison. Marriage should be


102 A DEVOUT LIFE.

preceded by three circumstances with relation to
the lady who is to be married : first, the person is
proposed to her ; second!//, she entertains the prop-
osition ; thirdly, she gives her consent. In like
manner, when God intends doing us some act of
great charity, or through our means to some other
person ; at first, he proposes it by inspiration ;
secondly, we are pleased with it; and thirdly, Ave
give our full consent to it. For, as there are
three steps by which we descend to the commission
of sin, viz., temptation, delectation, and consent;
so there are also three steps by which we ascend
to the practice of virtue : inspiration, which is op-
posite to temptation ; the delectation conceived in
the inspiration, which is opposite to the delecta-
tion in the temptation ; and the consent to the
inspiration, which is opposite to the consent given
to the temptation.

Now, though the inspiration should continue
during our whole life, yet we could not render
ourselves pleasing to God if we took no pleasure
in it ; on the contrary, he would be offended with
us, as he was with the Israelites, whose conversion
he had been soliciting very nearly forty years.
(Ps. xlv.) During this time they would give no
ear to him, and he swore in his wrath that they
should never enter into his rest. In like manner,
the gentleman that had for a long time served a
young lady would be very much disobliged, if,
after nil his attentions, she would not hearken to
the marriage he desired.

By the pleasure we take in inspirations we not
only show a disposition to glorify God, but begitf


RECEIVING INSPIRATIONS. 103

already to please his divine Majesty. For al-
though this delight is not an entire consent, yet
it is a certain disposition towards it, and if it be
a good sign to take pleasure in hearing the word
of God, which is an exterior inspiration, it must
also, no doubt, be a good thing and pleasing to
God, to take delight in his internal aspirations.
Of this kind of pleasure the sacred spouse speaks,
Cant. v. 6 : "My soul melted when my beloved
spoke." Thus the gentleman is already well
pleased with the lady whom he serves, and
esteems himself favored when he sees her take
delight in his service.

But, after all, it is the consent which perfects
the virtuous act. For, if after receiving and

o

taking pleasure in the inspiration, we neverthe-
less refuse our consent, we show ourselves ex-
tremely ungrateful, and highly offend his divine
Majesty, by our contempt of his favors. Thus it
happened to the spouse, for though the sweet-
voice of her beloved had touched her heart with
a holy pleasure, yet she would not open to him
the door, but excused herself by a frivolous ex-
cuse, with which her spouse, being justly dis-
pleased, went his way and left her. Thus, if
the gentleman, who after having for a lono- time
paid his addresses to a lady, and made his service
agreeable to her, is at last shaken off and spurned,
would he not have much more reason for dis-
content than if his suit had never been favored
with any encouragement ?

Resolve, then, Philothea, to accept with cor-
diality all the inspirations it shall please God to


104 A DEYOUT LIFE.

send you ; and when they come receive them ag
ambassadors sent by the King of heaven, who
desires to enter into a contract of marriage with
you. Attend calmly to his propositions, think
of the love with which you are inspired, cherish
the holy inspiration, and consent to the b.olv
motion, with an entire, a loving and a permanent
consent; for, by this means, God, whom you
cannot oblige, will hold himself greatly obliged
to your good will. But before you consent to
inspirations in things that are of great importance,
or that are out of the ordinary way, always con-
sult your spiritual guide, that he may examine
whether the inspiration be true or false, lest
you should be deceived ; because the enemy,
seeing a soal ready to consent to inspirations,
often proposes false ones to deceive her, which he
can never do, so long as she with humility obeys
her conductor.

The consent being given, you must diligent \y
procure the effects, and hasten to put the inspi-
ration into execution, which is the height of true
virtue ; for to have the consent within the heart
without producing its effects would be like plant-
ing a \me and not intending it should bring forth
fruit.

Now, what contributes wonderfully to all this
is the practice of the morning exercise, and of
those spiritual retirements above recommended,
as by these means we prepare ourselyes to do
what is good, not only by a general, but also by
a particular, preparation.


CONFESSION. 105


CHAPTER XIX.


OF HOLY CONFESSION.


5#^UR Saviour has left the holy sacrament of
slaw penance and confession to his Church, that
in it we might cleanse ourselves from all our
iniquities, as often as we should be denied by
them. Never suffer your heart then, O Philothea !
to remain long infected with sin, since you have
so easy a remedy at hand. As the lioness, hav-
ing been with the leopard, runs in haste to wash
herself, and get rid of the stench which the
meeting has left, lest the lion should be offended
and provoked ; so the soul, which has consented
to sin, ought to conceive a horror of herself, and
cleanse herself as quickly as possible, out of the
respect she ought to bear to the divine Majesty,
who incessantly beholds her. Alas, why should
we die a spiritual death, since we have so sover-
eign a remedy at hand !

Confess yourself kimibJy and devoutly once
every week, and always, if possible, before you
communicate, although your conscience should
not reproach tyou with the guilt of mortal sin,
for by confession you not only receive absolution
from the venial sins you confess, but likewise
strength to avoid them, light to discern them
well, and grace to repair all the damage you may
have sustained by them. You will also practise
the virtues of humility, obedience, sincerity,


106 A DEVOUT LIFE.

charity ; Day, in a word, in this one act of confes-
sion you shall exercise more virtues than in any
other whatsoever.

How small soever may be the sins which you
confess, you must always conceive a sincere
sorrow for them, and make a firm resolution
never to commit them for the time to come.
Many who confess their venial sins merely out
of custom, and for the sake of order, without
any thought of amendment, continue, by this
means, their whole lifetime, under the guilt of
these sins, and thus lose several spiritual adva*"
tages. If, then, you confess that you have spoken
some word that was not proper, or that you have
played excessively, repent, and form a deter-
mined resolution to amend ; for it is an abuse
to confess any kind of sin, whether mortal or
Yenial, without a will to be delivered from it,
mice confession was instituted for no other end.

Make no superfluous accusations, such as these :
I have not loved God as much as I ought ; I have
not prayed with as much devotion as I ought ;
I have not cherished my neighbor as I ought ;
I have not received the sacraments with as great
reverence as I ought, etc., etc. ; for in saying this
you will say nothing that can make your con-
fessor understand the state of your conscience,
since all the saints in heaven and on earth might
say the same thing if they were to come to con-
fession. Examine, then, what particular reason
you may have to make these accusations ; and
when you have discovered it accuse yourself
sincerely and distinctly. For example, you ao*


CONFESSION. 107

cuse yourself, that you have not loved your
neighbor as much as you ought; perhaps, be-
cause having seen some poor person in distress,
whom you might easily have assisted, you took
no notice of him. In this case, you should have
said, " Having seen a poor man in necessity,
I did not assist him as I might have done,"
through negligence, hard-heartedness, contempt,
or according to whatever you may discover to
have been the occasion of this fault. You must
not accuse yourself either of not having prayed
to God with as much devotion as you ought ;
but if you have admitted any voluntary distrac-
tion, or neglected to choose a proper place, or time,
or posture, requisite for engaging your attention
(n prayer, accuse yourself of it with simplicity,
-vithout those general allegations which signify
nothing in confession.

Content not yourself with confessing your venia?
sins, merely as to the fact, but accuse yourself
also of the motive which induced you to commit
them. For example, be not content to say you
have told a lie, without prejudice to any person:
but also declare whether it was vainglory, to
praise or to excuse yourself, or whether in jest or
through obstinacy. If you have sinned in play,
express whether it was from the desire of gain or
irom the pleasure of conversation, and so of the
T'est. Tell, also, how long a time you have con-
tinued in your sin ; for the length of time is an
aggravation of the evil, there being a great differ-
ence betwixt a vain thought that has slipped into
the soul for a quarter of an hour, and one whicir


108 A DEVOUT LIFE.

shfc has entertained for the space of two or three
day > We must, then, tell the fact, the motive, and
the c aitinuance of our sins. For though we are
not bcund to declare venial sins, nor absolutely
obliged to confess them, yet those who desire to
cleanse their souls perfectly, and attain to holy
devotion, must be careful to make their spiritual
physician acquainted with the evil of which they
desired to be cured, no matter how small it may be.

Fail not, then, to tell what is requisite, that he
may perfectly comprehend the nature of your
offence. For example, a man with whom I am
displeased speaks a light word to me in jest, and
I put myself into a passion, whereas, if another,
more agreeable to me, had said something more
harsh, I should have taken it in good part,- in this
case I would not fail to say, I have spoken angry
words against a certain person, and been affronted
at some things he said to me, not so much on
account of the words, as of my dislike to him.
Moreover, if, to make the matter more clear, it
was necessary to express what the words were, I
think it advisable to declare them, as by doing so,
you not only discover the sin, but also your evil
inclinations, customs, habits, and other roots of the
sin, by means of which your confessor acquires a
more perfect knowledge of the heart he treats with,
and of the most proper remedies to be applied.
But you must always conceal the person who has
had any part in your sin, as much as lies in your
power.

Be upon your guard against a number of sins
which are apt to conceal themselves and reign


FREQUENT COMMUNION. 109

insensibly in the soul. In order that you may
confess them and be able to free yourself of them,
read attentively the 6th, 27th, 28th, 29th, 35th,
and 36th chapters of the third part, and the 7th
chapter of the fourth part.

Change not easily your confessor, but, having
made choice of one, continue, from time to time, to
give him an account of the state of your conscience,
with candor and sincerity, at least once every
month or every two months. Let him also know
the state of your inclinations, though you may not
have sinned by them ; for instance, if you should
be tormented with sadness or with melancholy, or
if you should be inclined to mirth, or to the desires'
of acquiring worldly goods and such like inclina-
tions.


CHAPTER XX.

OF FREQUENT COMMUNION.

WT is said that Mithridates, king of Pontus, hav-
*- ing invented the mithridate, so strengthened
his body by the frequent use of it, that afterwards,
endeavoring to poison himself to avoid falling
under the servitude of the Romans, he could not
effect his object. To the end that we should live
forever, our Saviour has instituted the most ven-
erable sacrament of the Eucharist, which contains
really his flesh and his blood. Whoever, there-
fore, frequently eateth of this food, with devotion,


110 A DEVOUT LIFE.

so effectually confirmeth the health of his soul
that it is almost impossible he should be poisoned
by any kind of evil affection ; for Ave cannot be
nourished with this flesh of life, and at the same
time live with the affections of death. Thus, as
men dwelling in the terrestrial paradise might
have avoided corporal death by feeding on the
fruit of the tree of life which God had planted
therein, so they may also avoid spiritual death by
feeding on this sacrament of life. If the most
tender fruits, and such as are most subject to cor-
ruption, as cherries, strawberries, and apricots,
can be easily preserved the whole year with sugar
or honey, why should not our hearts, however
frail and weak, be preserved from the corruption
of sin, when seasoned and sweetened with the
incorruptible flesh and blood of the Son of God ''

0 Philothea ! what raply shall reprobate Christians
be able to make, when the just Judge shall
upbraid them with their folly, or rather madness,
in having involved themselves in eternal death,
since it was so easy to have maintained themselves
in spiritual life and health, by feeding on his
body, which he has left them with that intention?
Miserable wretches ! will he say, why did you
die, having the fruit and the food of life at your
command ?

"To receive the holy communion every day,"
says St. Augustine, "I neither recommend nor
discourage ; but to communicate every Sunday,

1 persuade and exhort every one, provided his
soul be without any affection to sin." With the
same holy doctor of the Church, I neither ab


FREQUENT COMMUNION. 11)

solutely condemn nor approve of the practice of
communicating- daily, but leave it to the discre-
tion of the ghostly father of him that would be
directed in this point. As the dispositions re-
quired for daily communion ought to be the most
exquisite, it is not prudent to recommend it gen-
erally to all ; and as these dispositions may be
found perfect in many holy souls, it is not ad-
visable to dissuade generally from it, but it is
better to leave it to be regulated by the consid-
eration of the inward state of each individual.
Wherefore, as it would be imprudent to advise
every one, without distinction, to frequent com-
munion, so it would be imprudent also to blame
any one for it, especially if he followed the advice
of a prudent director. When daily communion
was objected aguinst St. Catharine of Sienna, she
returned this modest and graceful answer :
" Since St. Austin blamed it not, I pray do not
you blame it, and I shall be content."

But as St. Austin, Philothea, strenuously ex-
horts us to communicate every Sunday, comply
with his advice as far as you may be able. For.
since I suppose you have no affection to either
mortal or venial sin, you are in that disposition
which St. Austin requires ; yea, and in a more
excellent degree, since you have not only an
aversion to commit sin, but you do not even retain
in you an affection to sin ; so that, should your
confessor think it proper, you may profitably com-
municate still more frequently than every Sunday.

However, many lawful impediments may occur,
not perhaps on your own part, but on the part of


112 A DEVOUT LIFE.

Ihose with whom you live, which may occasion a
discreet guide to advise you not to communicate so
often. For example : if you live in a state of
subjection to persons who are so ill instructed, or
so capricious as to be troubled or disquieted to
see you communicate so frequently, it would, in
such a case, be advisable to condescend to their
humor and receive holy communion but once a
fortnight ; but this is to be understood, when you
can by no other means remove the difficulty. As
there can be no general rule prescribed in this
case, we must act according to the advice of our
spiritual director; though I may say. with assur-
ance, that the distance between the times of com-
municating, for such as desire to serve God
devoutly should not exceed a month.

If you act with prudence, neither father, moth-
er, husband, nor wife, will prevent you from
communicating often ; for if, on the day of you"'
communion, you are not less diligent in the dis
charge of your duties, but acquit yourself of
them with more cheerfulness and alacrity, how-
ever irksome they may be, there is no likelihood
that any person will seek to prevent you from
an exercise in which no kind of inconvenience is
found. But if the spirit of those with whom you
live is so perverse and unreasonable as to give
you trouble on this account, as I have said already,
your director will advise you to use some conde-
scension.

I must say a word to married people. In the
old law, God disapproved that creditors should
sxact their debts on festival days, but h& never


FREQUENT COMMUNION. 113

disapproved that debtors should pay what they
owed to such as exacted it. It is an indecency,
though not a great sin, to solicit the payment of
the marriage debt on the day of communion ; but
it is not indecent, but rather meritorious, to pay
it. Wherefore no one ought to be debarred from
the communion for paying this debt, if otherwise
their devotion incite them to desire it. The
primitive Christians communicated every day,
although married, and blessed with a generation
of children ; whence I infer frequent communion
is by no means inconsistent with the state of a
parent, husband or wife, provided the party that
communicates be prudent and discreet. As for
bodily diseases, there are none which can be a
lawful impediment to this holy devotion, excepting
that which provokes to frequent vomiting.

To communicate every eight days, it is requisite
that one should be free from mortal sin, and any
affectiou to venial sin, and have, moreover, a
great desire of communicating ; but to communi-
cate every day, it is necessary Ave should over-
come the greatest part of our evil inclinations, and
that it should be by the advice of our spiritual
director.


114 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER XXL

HOW WE OUGHT TO COMMUNICATE.

?PJ?REPARE yourself for holy communion the
2ks? evening before by many ejaculations of love,
retiring earlier, that you may rise sooner in the
morning. Should you awake in the night, raise
your heart to God immediately, and make some
ardent aspirations, in order to prepare your soul
for the reception of her Spouse, who, being awake
whilst you were asleep, prepares a thousand
graces and favors for you, if, on your part,
you are disposed to receive them. In the
morning rise up with alacrity to enjoy the happi-
ness you hope for ; and, having confessed, go with
a great, but humble confidence, to receive this
heavenly food, which nourishes your soul to im-
mortality ; and after repeating thrice, "Lord, I am
not worthy," etc., cease to move your head or your
lips to pray, or to sigh, but opening your mouth
gently and moderately, and lifting up your head
as much as is necessary, that the priest may see
what he is about, full of faith, hope, and charity,
receive him, in whom, by whom, and for whom,
you believe, hope, and whom you love. O Philo-
thea ! represent to yourself, that as the bee, after
gathering from the flowers the dew of heaven, and
the choicest juice of the earth, reducing them into
honey, carries it into her hive, so the priest,
having taken from the altar the Saviour of thp


HOW WE SHOULD COMMUNICATE. 115

world, the true Son of God, who, as the dew, i.s
descended from heaven, and the true Son of the
Virgin, who, as a flower is sprung from the earth
of our humanity, puts him as delicious food into
your mouth and body.

Having received him in your breast, excite your
heart to do homage to the author of your salvation ;
treat with him concerning your internal affairs ;
consider that he has taken up his abode within
you for your happiness ; make him, then, as
welcome as you possibly can, and conduct your-
self in such a manner as to make it appear by all
your actions that God is with you.

But when you cannot enjoy the benefit of really
communicating at the holy mass, communicate, at
least, spiritually, uniting yourself by an ardent
desire to this life-giving tlesh of our Saviour.

Your principal intention in communicating
should be to advance in virtue, to strengthen }'our-
self in the love of God, and to receive comfort from
this love ; for you must receive through love that
which love alone caused to be given to you. You
cannot consider our Saviour in an action, either
more full of love or more tender than this, in which
he annihilates himself, or, as we may more properly
say, changes himself into food, that so he may
penetrate our souls and unite himself most inti-
mately to the heart and to the body of his faithful.

If worldlings ask you why you communicate so
often, tell them it is to learn to love God, to purify
yourself from your imperfections, to be delivered
from your miseries, to be comforted in your afflic-
tions, and supported in your weaknesses. Tel)


116 A DEVOUT LIFE.

them that two sorts of persons ought to communi-
cate frequently : the perfect, because, being well
disposed, they would be greatly to blame not to
approach |o the source and fountain of perfection ,
and the imperfect, to the end that they may be able
to aspire to perfection ; the strong, lest they should
become weak ; and the iveak, that they may become
strong; the sick, that they may be restored to
health ; and the healthy, lest they should fall into
sickness ; that for your part, being imperfect, weak,
and sick, you have need to communicate frequently
with Him who is your perfection, your strength,
and your physician. Tell them that those who
have not many worldly affairs to look after ought
to communicate often, because they have leisure ;
that those who have much business on hand should
also communicate often, for he who labors much
and is loaded with pains ought to eat solid food,
and that frequently. Tell them that you receive
the holy sacrament to learn to receive it well ;
because one hardly performs p.n action well which
he does not often practise.

Communicate frequently, then, Philothea, and
as frequently as you can, with *he advice of your
ghostly father ; and, believe me, as hares in oui
mountains become white in winter, because the;y
neither see nor eat anything but snow, so, by ap-
proaching to, and eating beauty, purity, and good-
ness itself, in this divine sacrament, you will be-
come altogether fair, pure, and virtuous.


art Cfnrtr*


CONTAINS SEVERAL INSTRUCTIONS CONCERNING THE
PRACTICE OP VIRTUES •:


CHAPTER I.

OF THE CHOICE WE OUGHT TO MAKE AS TO THE EXERCISE Of

VIRTUES.

|3pS the queen of the bees never goes abroad into
*^ the fields without being surrounded by all hei
little subjects, so charity, the queen of virtues,
never enters the heart without bringing all the
other virtues in her train, exercising and disciplin-
ing them as a captain does his soldiers. But she
neither employs them all at the same time, nor in
the same manner, nor in all seasons, nor in every
place ; for as the just man, like a tree planted by
the river side, brings forth fruit in due season, so
charity, watering the soul, produces a variety of
good works, each one in its proper time. "Music,
how agreeable soever in itself, is out of season in
time of mourning," says the proverb. It is a great
fault in many, who, undertaking the practice of
some particular virtue, wish to exercise it on all
occasions. Like some ancient philosophers, they
either always weep or laugh ; and, what is yet
worse, they censure those who do not always, like
themselves, exercise the same virtues ; whereas,


118 A DEVOUT LIFE,

we should w rejoice with the joyful, and weep with
them that weep," says the Apostle; "for charity
is patient, kind, bountiful, discreet, and conde-
scending."

There are, however, some virtues of so general
utility as not only to require an exercise of them-
selves apart, hut also communicate their qualities
to the practice of other virtues. Occasions are
seldom presented for the exercise of fortitude,
magnanimity, and magnificence ; but meekness,
temperance, modesty, and humility, are virtues
wherewith all the actions of our life should be
tempered. It is true, there are other virtues
more agreeable, but the use of these is more nte-
essary. Sugar is more agreeable than salt ; but
the use of salt is more necessary and general.
Therefore we must constantly have a good store
of these general virtues in readiness, since we
stand in need of them almost continually.

In the exercise of the virtues we should always
prefer that which is most conformable to our duty,
not that which is most agreeable to our imagina-
tion. St. Paula was prejudiced in favor of corpo-
ral austerities and mortifications, that she might
more easily enjoy spiritual comfort ; but she was
under a greater obligation to obey her superiors.
and therefore St. Jerome blamed her for using
immoderate abstinences against her bishop's ad-
vice. The apostles, on the other hand, being
commissioned to preach the gospel and distribute
the bread of heaven, thought that they should act
wrongly by interrupting these evangelical exer-
cises for Tlie relief of the poor, which, though, is


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES. 119

in itself an excellent virtue. Every condition of
life has its own peculiar virtue. The virtues of
a prelate are different from those of a prince ;
those of a soldier from those of a married woman,
or a widow, and so on through every class of soci-
ety. Though all ought to possess all the virtues,
yet all are not equally bound to exercise them;
but each ought to practise, in a more particular
manner, those virtues which are most requisite for
the state of life to which he is called.

Among the virtues unconnected with our par-
ticular duty we must prefer the excellent to the
glittering and showy. Comets appear greater
than stars, and apparently occupy a greater space ;
whereas, in reality, they can neither in magnitude
nor equality be compared to the stars ; for a^
they only seem great because they are nearer, and
appear in a grosser manner than the stars, so there-
are certain virtues, which, on account of their
proximity, become more sensible, or, to use the
expression, more material, that are highly esteemed
and always preferred by the vulgar. Hence it i?
that so many prefer corporal alms before spiritual ;
the hair-shirt, fasting, going barefoot, using the
discipline, and other such corporal mortifications,
before meekness, mildness, modesty, and other
mortifications of the heart; which are, neverthe-
less, more exalted. Choose then, Philothea, the
best virtues, not the most esteemed ; the most
noble, not the most apparent ; those that are
actually the best, not those that are the most
ostensible or shining.

It is profitable for every one to exercise some


120 A DEVOUT LIFE.

particular virtue, yet not so as to abandon the
rest, but to keep his spirit in a more settled order.
A fair virgin, in royal attire, more bright than the
sun, whose head was decorated with a crown of
olives, appeared to St. John, bishop of Alexan-
dria,- and said to him : " I am the eldest daughter
ol the king : if thou canst have me for thy frie**3.,
I shall conduct thee to his presence." He under-
stood that she was mercy towards the poor, which
God recommended to him ; and therefore ever
after he gave himself up so absolutely to the prac-
tice of this virtue as to obtain the title of St. John
the Almoner. Eulogius, the Alexandrian, desir-
ing to render God some particular service, and not
having strength enough to embrace a solitary life,
nor to subject himself to the obedience of another,
took a poor wretch, quite eaten up with the
leprosy, into his house, that he might exercise
towards him the virtues of charity and mortifica-
tion ; and, to perform them the more worthily, he
made a vow to honor and serve him as his lord
and master : being tempted to separate, they
addressed themselves to the great St. Anthony,
who said, "Take care, my children, not to sepa-
rate from each other, for being both of you near
your end, if the angel should not find you together,
you run a great risk of losing your crown."

St. Lewis visited hospitals, and attended the
sick as diligently as if he had served for wages.
St. Francis had so extraordinary a love for pov-
erty as to call her his lady, and St. Dominick, for
preaching, from which his order takes its name.
St. Gregory the Great, following the example of


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES. 121

Abraham, took pleasure in entertaining pilgrims,
and like him received the King of Glory in the
form of a pilgrim. Tobias exercised his charity
in burying the dead, St. Elizabeth, though a
great princess, delighted in nothing so much as in
abasing herself. St. Catharine of Genoa, in her
widowhood, dedicated herself to serve a hospital.
Cassian relates that a devout lady, desirous to
exercise the virtue of patience, came to St. Atha-
nasius, who, at her request, placed with her a
poor widow, so exceedingly peevish, choleric, and
troublesome, that by her insupportable temper
she gave the good lady ample occasion to exercise
the virtues of meekness and charity.

Thus, among the servants of God, some apply
themselves to serve the sick ; others to relieve the
poor ; others to propagate the knowledge of the
Christian doctrine amongst children ; others to
reclaim souls that are gone astray ; others to adorn
churches and decorate altars ; others to restore
peace and concord amongst those who have been
at variance. As embroiderers lay gold, silver,
and silk on their several grounds, with such an
admirable variety of colors as to resemble all
kinds of flowers, so these pious souls make choice
of some particular devotion to serve as a ground
for the spiritual embroidery of all other virtues,
holding thereby all their actions and affections
better united and ordered, by referring them to
their principal exercise ; and thus they show forth
their spirit in its gilded clothing, surrounded with
variety. Ps. xliv. 10.

When assaulted by any vice we must embrace


122 A DEVOUT LIFE.

the practice of the contrary virtue, and refer all the
others to it ; by which means we shall overcome
our enemy, and at the same time advance in all vir-
tues. Thus, if assaulted by pride or by anger, we
must, in all our actions, practise humility and meek-
ness ; and make all our other exercises ot prayer, and
the sacraments of prudence, constancy, and sobri-
ety, subservient to this end. For as the wild
boar, to sharpen his tusks, wets and polishes them
with his other teeth, and by this means sharpens
all of them ; so a virtuous man, having undertaken
to perfect himself in that virtue of which he stands
in most need for his defence, files and polishes it
by the exercise of the other virtues, whilst the}?
help to refine that one, make all of them become
better polished. Thus it happened to Job, who,
exercising himself particularly in patience, against
the many temptations wherewith he was assaulted,
became perfectly established and confirmed in all
kinds of virtues. Nay, St. Gregory Nazianzen
says, "that by the perfect exercise of one only
virtue a person may attain to the height of all the
rest ; " for which he alleges the example of Rahab,
who, having exactly practised the virtue of hospi-
tality, arrived at a great degree of Glory. But
this is to be understood of a virtue which is prac-
tised with great fervor and charity


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES- 123


CHAPTER II.

A CONTINUATION OF THE FORMER DISCOURSE ABOUT THE
CHOICE OF VIRTUES.

^SJFOUNG beginners in devotion, says St. Austin,
eUP commit certain faults, which, according to the
rigor of the laws of perfection, are blamable and
yet commendable, on account of the presage they
£ive of future excellence in piety, to which they
serve as a disposition. That low and servile fear
which begets excessive scruples in the souls of
new converts from a course of sin, is commendable
in oeginners, and a certain foreboding of a future
purity of conscience ; but the same fear would be
blamable in those who are far advanced, in whose
heart love ought to reign, which by imperceptible
degrees chases away this kind of servile fear.

St. Bernard, at the beginning, was full of rigoi
towards those that put themselves under his direc-
tion ; he told them that they must leave the body
behind, and come to him only with the spirit.
When he heard their confessions he severely
reprehended the most trivial faults, and urged
them on to perfection, with such vehemence that,
instead of making them advance forward, he drew
them back ; for they fell into despondency at
seeing themselves so earnestly pressed up so steep
and high an ascent. Observe, Philothea, it was an
ardent zeal for perfect purity that induced this
great saint to adopt this manner of proceeding.


124 A DEVOUT LIFEc

This zeal of the saint was a great virtue, but a
virtue nevertheless reprehensible ; of which God
himself, in a holy vision, made him sensible, infus-
ing at the same time into his soul so meek, amiable,
and tender a spirit, that, being totally changed,
he repented of his former rigor and severity, and
became so gracious and condescending to every
one as to make himself all to all, that he might
gain all. St. Jerome having related Lloav his
dear daughter, St. Paula, was not only excessive,
but obstinate, in the exercise of bodily mortifica-
tion, to such a degree that she would not yield to
the contrary advice of Epiphanius, her bishop, and,
moreover, that she suffered herself to be carried
away with so excessive grief for the death of her
friends as to be herself frequently in danger of
death, concludes at length with these words : r' Some
will say, that, instead of writing the praises of this
holy woman, I write reprehensions and dispraises *
but I call Jesus to witness, whom she served, and
whom I desire to serve, that I lie not either on the
one side, or on the other, but set down sincerely
what related to her, as one Christian should do of
another; that is to say, 1 write her history, not
her panegyric ; and that her vices are the virtues
of others ; " meaning that the failings and defects of
St. Paula would have been esteemed virtue in a
soul less perfect, and that there are actions es-
teemed imperfections in the perfect, which would
be held great perfections in those who are imper-
fect.

It is a £food sign, when "at the end of sickness"
ihe legs of the sick person swell, for it shows that


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES. 125

nature, now acquiring strength, expels her super-
fluous humors ; but this would be a bad symptom
in a healthy person ; as it would show that nature
has not sufficient strength to resolve and dissipate
the humors. We must, my Philothea, have a
good opinion of those who practise virtue, though
imperfectly, since we see the saints themselves
have often practised them in this manner. But, as
to ourselves, we must be careful to exercise them,
not only faithfully, but discreetly ; and to this end
we must strictly observe the advice of the wise
man, " not to rely on our own prudence," but on the
judgment of those whom God has given us for
conductors.

There are certain things which many esteem as
virtues, which in reality are not : I mean ecstasies,
or raptures, insensibilities, impassibilities, deiflcai
unions, elevations, transformations, and similar
perfections, treated of in certain 'nooks, which
promise to elevate the soul to a contemplation
purely intellectual, to an essential application of
the spirit, and a supernatural life. But observe
well, Philothea, these perfections are not virtues,
but rather the recompenses of virtues, or small
specimens of the happiness of the life to come,
which God sometimes presents to men, to make
them enraptured with the whole piece, which is
only to be found in heaven.

But we must not aspire to their favors, since
they are by no means necessary to the serving and
loving of Gcd, which should be our only preten-
sion ; neither are they such as can be obtained by
labor and industry, since they are rather passions


126 A DEVOUT LIFE.

than actions, which we may indeed receive, but
cannot produce in ourselves. I add that we have
only undertaken, and must e trenuously endeavor
to render ourselves good, devout, and godly ; but,
if it should please God to elevate us to these an-
gelical perfections, we, also, shall then be angels.
In the meantime let us endeavor humbly and
devoutly to acquire those simple virtues for which
our Saviour has exhorted us to labor ; such as
patience, meekness, mortification of the heart,
humility, obedience, poverty, chastity, tenderness
towards our neighbors, bearing with their imper-
fections, diligence, and holy fervor. Let us leave
these supereminent favors to elevated souls ; we
merit not so hiirh a rank in the service of God ;
we shall be too happy to serve him in his kitchen
or to be his domestics in much lower stations. If
he should hereafter think proper to admit us into
his cabinet, or privy council, it will be through
the excess of his bountiful goodness. Yea, Philo-
thea, the King of Glory does not recompense his
servants according to the dignity of the offices they
hold, but according to the measure of the love
and humility with which they exercise them.
Saul, seeking the asses of his father, found the
kingdom of Israel. Rebecca, watering the camels
of Abraham, became the spouse of his son. Ruth,
gleaning after the reapers of Boaz, and laying
down at his feet, was advanced to his side and
made his wife. High and elevated pretensions to
extraordinary favors are subject to illusion and
deceit ; and it sometimes happens that those who
imagine themselves angels are not so much as


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES. 127

good men, and that there is more sublimity in
their words and expressions than in their manner
of thinking and acting. We must neither despise
nor censure any one ; but, blessing God for the
supereminence of others, keep ourselves in oui
lower but safer way, less eminent, but better
suited to our insufficiency and littleness ; in which,
if we conduct ourselves with humility and fidelity,
God will infallibly elevate us to a situation tha*
will be truly exalted.


CHAPTER III.

OF PATIENCE.


dpJATIEXCE is necessary for you ; that, doing
*^ the will of God, you may receive the
premise," — Heb. x. 36. If our Saviour him-
self has declared, Luke xxi. 19, "In your
patience you shall possess your souls," should it
not be, Philothea, a great happiness for man to
possess his soul ? — and the more perfect our pa-
tience, the more absolutely do we possess them.
Let us frequently call to mind, that as our Lord
has saved us by patient sufferings, so we also ought
to work out our salvation by sufferings and afflic-
tions ; enduring injuries and contradictions with
all possible meekness.

Limit not your patience to this or that kind of
injuries and afflictions, but extend it universally


128 A DEVOUT LITE.

to all those that it shall please God to send you.
Some are unwilling to suffer any tribulations but
those that are honorable ; for example, to be
wounded in battle, to be a prisoner of war, to be
persecuted for religion, or impoverished by some
lawsuit determined in their favor ; now these
people do not love the tribulation, but the honor
wherewith it is accompanied ; whereas he that is
truly patient suffers, indifferently, tribulations,
whether accompanied by ignominy or honor. To
be despised, reprehended, or accused by wicked
men is pleasant to a man of good heart ; but to
suffer blame and ill-treatment from the virtuous,
or from our friends and relations, is the test of
true patience. I admire the meekness with which
the oreat St. Charles Borromeo suffered a lono;
time the public reprehensions that a great preacher
of a strictly reformed order uttered against him
in the pulpit, more than all the assaults he re-
ceived from others ; for as the sting of a bee is
far more painful than that of a fly, so the evils we
suffer from good men are much more insupporta-
ble than those we suffer from others ; and yet iJ
often happens that two good men, having each of
them the best intentions, through a diversity of
opinion, foment great persecutions and contradic-
tions against each other.

Be patient, not only with respect to the subject
of the affliction which may befall you, but also
with regard to its accessories or accidental circum-
stances. Many conld be content to encounter
evils, provided they might not be incommoded by
them. I am not vexed, savs one, at being poor,


PRACTICE OF THE VIRTUES. 129

if it had not disabled me to serve my friends, to
give my children proper education ; or to live as
honorable as I could wish. It would give me no
concern, says another, were it not that the world
would think it happened through my own fault.
Another would be content to suffer the scandal
patiently, provided no one would believe the
detractor. Others are willing to suffer some part
of the evil, but not the whole ; they do not com-
plain on account of their sickness, but for the
want of money to obtain a cure, or because they
are so troublesome to those about them. Xow, I
say, Philothea, we must not only bear sickness
with patience, but also be content to suffer sick-
ness under any disorder, and in any place, amongst
those persons, and with those inconveniences, which
God pleases ; and the same must be said of other
tribulations. When any evil befalls you, apply
the remedies that may be in your power, agree-
ably to the will of God ; for to act otherwise
would be to tempt divine Providence. Having
done this, wait with resignation for the success it
may please God to send ; and, should the remedies
overcome the evil, return him thanks with hu-
mility , but if, on the contrary, the evils overcome
the remedies, bless him with patience.

Attend to the following advice of St. Gregory :
whenever you are "justly accused" of a fault,
humble yourself, and candidly confess that you
deserve more than the accusation which is
brought against you ; but, if the charge be false,
excuse yourself meekly, denying your guilt, for
you owe this respect to truth, and to the edifi-


130 A DEVOUT LIFE.

cation of your neighbor. But if, after your true
and lawful excuse, they should continue to ac-
cuse you, trouble not yourself nor strive to have
your excuse admitted ; for, having discharged your
duty to truth, you must also do the same to hu-
mility, by which means you neither offend against
the care you ought to have of your reputation, nor
the love you owe to peace, meekness of heart, and
humility.

Complain as little as possible of the wrongs you
suffer ; for, commonly speaking, he that com-
plains sins, because self-love magnifies the in-
juries we suffer, and makes us believe them
greater than they really are. Make no com-
plaint to choleric or consorious persons ; but if
complaints be necessary, either to remedy the
offence or restore quiet to your mind, let them
be made to the meek and charitable, who truly
love God ; otherwise, instead of easing your heart,
they will provoke it to greater pain ; for, instead
of extracting the thorn, they will sink it the
deeper.

Many, on being sick, afflicted, or injured by
others, refrain from complaining or showing a
sensibility of what the)' suffer, lest it should ap-
pear that they wanted Christian fortitude, and
resignation to the will of God ; but still they
contrive divers artifices, that others should not
only pity and compassionate their sufferings and
afflictions, but also admire their patience and
fortitude. Now this is not a true patience, but
rather a refined ambition and subtle vanity.
*They have glory," says the apostle, "but not


PRACTICE OF THE A IRTUES. 131

with God." The truly patient man neither com-
plains himself nor desires to be pitied by others ;
he speaks of his sufferings with truth and sin-
cerity, without murmuring, complaining, or ag-
gravating the matter. He patiently receives
condolence, unless he is pitied for an evil which
he does not suffer, for then he modestly declares
that he does not suffer on that account, and thus
he continues peaceable betwixt truth and patience,
acknowledging, but not complaining of the evil.

Amidst the contradictions which shall infalli-
bly befall you in the exercise of devotion, re-
member the words of our Lord, John xvi. 21 :
"A woman when she is in labor, hath sorrow
because her hour is come ; but when she hath
brought forth her child, she remembereth no
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born
into the world.*' For you have conceived Jesus
Christ, the noblest child in the world, in your
soul, and until he is quite brought forth, you
cannot but suffer in your labor; but be of good
courage, these sorrows once past, everlasting joy
shall remain with you for having brought him
forth. Xow you shall have wholly brought him
forth, when you have entirely formed him in your
heart and in your works, by an imitation of his
life.

In sickness offer up all your griefs and pains
is a sacrifice to our Lord, and beseech him to
unite them with the torments he suffered for
you. Obey your physician, take your medicines,
food, and other remedies, for the love of God,
remembering the gall he took for your sake ;


132 A DEVOUT LITE.

lesire to be cured, that you may serve him,
but refuse not to continue sick, that you may
obey him ; and dispose yourself for death, if it
be his pleasure, that you may joraise and enjo}'
him forever.

Remember, that as bees, whilst making their
honey, live upon a bitter provision, so we can
never perform acts of greater sweetness, nor
better compose the honey of excellent virtues,
than whilst we eat the bread of bitterness, and
live in the midst of afflictions. And as the
honey that is gathered from the flowers of thyme,
a small bitter herb, is the best, so the virtue which
is exercised in the bitterness of the meanest and
most abject tribulations is preferable.

Consider frequently Christ Jesus crucified,
naked, blasphemed, slandered, forsaken, and
overwhelmed with all sorts of troubles, sorrows,
and labors ; and remember that all your suffer-
ings, either in quality or quantity, are not com-
parable to his, and that you can never suffer
anything for him equal to that which he has
endured for you.

Consider the torments the martyrs have suf-
fered, and those which many at present endure
more grievous without any comparison than
yours, and then say : Alas ! are not my suffer-
ings consolations, and my pains pleasures, in
comparison of those, who, without any relief,
assistance, or mitigation, live in a continual
death, overcharged with afflictions infinitely
greater than mine ?


OF EXTERIOR HUMILITY. 133

CHAPTER IV.

OF EXTERIOR HUMILITY.

^MORROTT empty vessels, not a few," said Eli-
■■** seus to the poor widow, 4 Kings iv. 3 ; " and
pour oil into them." To receive the grace of God
into our hearts they must be emptied of vainglory.
As the Castrel,1 by crying and looking on the
birds of prey, affrights them by a secret property
peculiar to itself, which makes the doves love her
above all other birds, and live in security with
her : so humility repels Satan, and preserves the
grace and gift of the Holy Ghost within us. All
the Saints, but particularly the King of Saints and
his Mother, have always honored and cherished
this blessed virtue more than any amongst the
moral virtues. T\re call that glory vain which we
assume to ourselves, either for what is not in us,
or for what is in us, and belongs to us, but deserves
not that we should glory in it. The nobility of
our ancestors, the favor of great men, and popular
honor, are things, not in us, but either in our pro-
genitors, or in the esteem of other men. Some
become proud and insolent, either by riding a good
horse, wearing: a feather in their hat, or by beino;
dressed in a fine suit of clothes ; but who does not
see the folly of this? for if there be any glory in
such things, the glory belongs to the horse, the
bird, and the tailor; and what a meanness of heart

1 Or Kestrel, a bird of the hawk kind


134 A DEVOUT LIFE.

must it be, to borrow esteem from a horse, from &
feather, or some ridiculous new fashion ! Others
value themselves for a well-trimmed beard, for
curled locks, or soft hands ; or because they can
dance, sing, or play ; but are not these effeminate
men, who seek to raise their reputation by so friv-
olous and foolish things? Others, for a little
(earning, would be honored and respected by the
whole world, as if everyone ought to become their
pupil, and account them his masters. These are
called pedants. Others strut like peacocks, con-
templating their beauty and think themselves ad-
mired by every one. All this is extremely vain,
foolish, and impertinent ; and the glory which is
raised on so weak foundations is justly esteemed
vain and frivolous.

True goodness is proved like true balm ; for as
balm, when dropped into water, if it sinks and rests
at the bottom, is so accounted the most excellent
and precious ; so, if you would know whether l
man be truly wise, learned, or generous, observe
whether his qualifications tend to humility, mod-
esty, and submission ; for then they shall be good
indeed ; but if they swim on the surface, and strive
to appear above water, they shall be so much the
less true, in the same proportion as they appear.
As pearls, that are conceived and nourished by the
wind, or by the noise of thunder, have nothing of
the substance of pearls, but merely the external
appearance ; so the virtues and good qualities of
men that are bred and nourished by pride, osten-
tation, and vanity, have nothing but the appearance
of good.


OF EXTERIOR HUMILITY. 135

Honors, rank, and dignities, are like saffron,
which thrives best, and grows most plentifully,
when trodden under foot. It is no honor to be
beautiful when a man prizes himself for it : beauty,
to have a good grace, should be neglected ; and
learning is a disgrace to us when it degenerates
into pedantry.

If we stand upon the punctilio for places, pre-
cedency, and titles, besides exposing our qualities
to be examined, tried, and contradicted, we render
them vile and contemptible ; for as honor is
beautiful when freely given, so it becomes base
when exacted or sought after. When the peacock
spreads his tail to admire himself, in raising up
his beautiful feathers he ruffles all the rest, and
discovers his deformities. Flowers that are fair
whilst they grow in the earth wither and fade
when handled ; and as they that smell the mandrake
at a distance perceive a most agreeable fragrance,
whilst they that approach become sick and stupefied,
so honors give a pleasant satisfaction to those that
view them afar off, without stopping to amuse
themselves with them, or being earnest about them.
Those who affect them, or feed on them, are
exceedingly blamable, and worthy of reprehen-
sion.

The pursuit and love of virtue begin to make us
virtuous ; but the pursuit and love of honor make
us contemptible and worthy of blame. Generous
minds do not amuse themselves about the petty
toys of rank, honor, and salutation : they have
other things to perform ; such baubles only belong
to degenerate spirits.


136 A DEVOUT LITE.

He that may have pearls never loads himself
with shells ; and such as aspire to virtue trouble
not themselves about honors. Every one indeed
may take and keep his own place without prejudice
to humility, so that it be done carelessly, and
without contention. For as they that come from
Peru, besides gold and silver, bring also thence apes
and parrots, because they neither cost much, nor
are burdensome ; so they that aspire to virtue
refuse not the rank and honor due to them, pro-
vided it cost them not too much care and attention,
nor involve them in trouble, anxiety, disputes, or
contentions. Nevertheless, I do not here allude
to those whose dignity concerns the public, nor to
certain particular occasions of important conse-
quences ; for in these every one ought to keep
what belongs to him, with prudence and. discretion,
accompanied by charity and suavity of manners.


CHAPTER V.

OF MORE INTERNAL HUMILITY.

|UT you desire. Philothea, to penetrate still
deeper into humility ; for what I have hitherto
said rather concerns wisdom than humility. Let us,
then, proceed. Many neither will not and dare
not consider the particular favors God has done
them, lest it might excite vainglory and self-
complacency ; but in doing so they deceive


OF MORE INTERNAL HUMILITY. 137

themselves ; for since the best means to attain the
love of God (says the great angelical Doctor) is
the consideration of his benefits, the more we know
them the more shall we love him ; and as the par-
ticular benefits he has conferred on us more power-
fully move us than those that are common to others,
so ought they to be more attentively considered.
Certainly nothing can so effectually humble us be-
fore the mercy of God as the multitude of his
benefits ; nor so much humble us before his justice as
the enormity of our innumerable offences. Let us,
then, consider what he has done for us, and what we
have done against him ; and as we reflect on our
sins, one by one, so let us consider his favors in the
same order. We must not fear lest the knowledge ol
his gifts make us proud, so long as we are attentive
to this truth, "that whatsoever there is of good in
us is not from ourselves." Do mules cease to be
disgusting beasts, because they are laden with the
precious and perfumed goods of the prince ? " What
hast thou which thou hast not received?" says the
apostle, 1 Cor. iv. 7. "And if thou hast received
it, why dost thou glory?" Nay, on the contrary,
the lively consideration of favors received makes
us humble, because a knowledge of them excites
gratitude. But if, in considering the favors that
God has conferred on us, any thoughts of vanity
should attack us, it will be an infallible remedy to
recur to the consideration of cur ingratitudes,
imperfections, and miseries. If we consider what
xv e did when God was not with u.s, we shall easily
oe convinced that what we do while he is with us
iS not of our own exertion ; Ave shall indeed rejoice


138 A DEVOUT LIFE.

in it, because we enjoy it, but we shall glorify
God, because he alone is the author of it. Thus
the blessed Virgin confesses that God had done
great things for her, but it is only to humble
herself, and to glorify God: "My soul," says she,
ff doth magnify the Lord, because he has done
great things for me." Luke i. 46, 49.

We often confess ourselves to be nothing, nay,
misery itself, and the refuse of the world ; but
would be very sorry that any one should believe
us, or tell others that we are really so miserable
wretches. On the contrary, we pretend to retire,
and hide ourselves, so that the world may run
after us, and seek us out. We feign to wish
ourselves considered as the last in the company,
and sit down at the lowest end of the table ; but it
is with a view7 that we may be desired to pass to
the upper end. True humility never makes a
show of herself, nor uses many humble words ;
for she desires not only to conceal all other virtues,
but principally herself; and, were it lawful to
dissemble, or scandalize her neighbor, she would
perforin actions of arroganey and haughtiness,
that she might conceal herself beneath them and
remain altogether unknown.

My advice, therefore, Philothea, is that we
should either not accustom ourselves to words of
humility, or else use them with a sincere interior
sentiment, conformably to what we pronounce
outwardly. Let us never cast down our eyes but
when we humble our hearts ; let us not seem to
desire to be the lowest, unless wo sincerely desire
it I think this rule so general as to admit of no


OF MORE INTERNAL HUMILITY. 139

exception ; I only add, that civility requires Ave
should sometimes offer precedency to those who
will doubtless refuse it, and yet this is neither
duplicity nor false humility; for in this case, as
the offer of precedency is only the beginning of
honor, and since we cannot give it them entirely,
we do well to give them the beginning. I say,
though some words of honor or respect may not
seem strictly conformable to the truth, yet they
are sufficiently so, provided the heart of him that
pronounces them has a sincere intention to honor
and respect him to whom they are addressed, for
although the words signify with some excess that
which we would say, yet we do not act wrongly in
using them when common custom requires it ;
however, I wish our Avords were always as nearly
as possible suited to our affections, that so we
might follow ; in all and through all, a cordial
sincerity and candor. A man that is truly humble
would rather another should say to him that he is
miserable, and that he is nothing, than to say it
himself; at least, if he knows that any man says so
he does not contradict it, but heartihr agrees to it ;
for, believing it himself firmly, he is pleased that
others entertain the same opinion.

Many say that they leave mental prayer to those
that are perfect ; that, as for themselves, they are
unworthy to use it. Others protest they dare
not communicate often, because they find them-
selves not sufficiently pure. Others fear they
should bring disgrace upon devotion if they
meddled with it, by reason of their great misery
and frailty. Others refuse to employ their talents


140 A DEVOUT LIFE.

in the service of God and their neighbor, saying
they know their own weakness, and fear they
should become proud if they proved instruments
of any good ; and that, in giving light to others,
they should consume themselves in the flames of
vanity. All this is nothing but an artificial kind
of humility, false and malicious, whereby they
tacitly and subtilely seek to find fault with the
things of God ; or, at the best, to conceal the love
of their own opinion, humor, and sloth, under the
pretext of humility. " Ask thee a sign of the Lord
thy God either unto the depth of hell, or to the
height above," said the prophet (Isaias vii. 11)
to unhappy Achaz ; and he answered, "I will not
ask, neither will I tempt the Lord." Oh ! the
wicked man ! He would seem to bear an extreme
veverence to God, and excuses himself, under the
^olor of humility, from aspiring to that grace
which the divine goodness offers him ; but does he
not see, that when God desires to give us his
graces, it is pride to refuse them ;that the gifts of
God oblige us to receive them ; and that it is
humility to obey, and to comply as nearly as Ave
can with his desires? The desire of God is, that
we should be perfect, uniting ourselves to him,
and imitating him as nearly as possible. The
proud man, who trusts in himself, has just reason
not to attempt anything ; but he that is humble is
so much the more courageous, by how much the
more he acknowledges his own inability ; and the
more wretched he esteems himself the more con-
fident he becomes ; because he places his whole
trust in God, who delights to display his omnipo-


OF MORE INTERNAL HUMILITY. l4l

tence in our weakness, and to elevate his mercy
upon our misery. We may then humbly and
devoutly presume to undertake all that may be
judged proper for our advancement by those thai
conduct our souls.

To imagine we know what we do not know il
folly ; to desire to pass for knowing that of which
we are ignorant is an intolerable vanity. For my
part, as I would not make a parade of the knowl-
edge even of that which I know ; so, on the other
hand, I would not pretend to be ignorant thereof.
When charity requires it we must freely and
mildly communicate to our neighbor, not only
what is necessary for our instruction, but, also,
what is profitable for our consolation ; for humility,
which conceals virtues, in order to preserve them,
discovers them, nevertheless, when charity re-
quires it, in order that w^e may enlarge, increase,
and perfect them. In this respect humility
imitates a certain tree in the Isles of Tylos, that
at night closes up her beautiful carnation flowers,
and only opens them to the rising sun ; and as the
inhabitants of the country say that those flowers
sleep by night, so humility covers all our virtuous
and human perfections, and never unfolds them
except for the sake of charity, which, being not a
human and moral, but a divine and heavenly vir-
tue, is the true son of all other virtues, over which
she ought always to have dominion. Hence we
may conclude that those humilities which are
prejudicial to charity are assuredly false.

I would neither pretend to be a fool nor a wise
man ; for if humility forbids me to conceal my


142 4. DEVOUT LIFE.

wisdom, candor and sincerity also forbid me to
counterfeit the fool ; and as vanity is opposite to
humility, so artifice, affectation, and dissimulation
are contrary to sincerity. But, if some great ser-
vants of God have pretended to be fools, to render
themselves more abject in the eyes of the world,
we must admire, but not imitate, them ; for, having
had peculiar and extraordinary motives that in-
duced them to this excess, no one ought thence to
draw any consequence for himself. David, when
he danced and leaped before the ark of the cove-
nant with an excess that ordinary decency could
not admire, had no design to make the world be-
lieve him foolish ; but, with all simplicity and
openness, he made use of those exterior motions
to express the extraordinary and excessive joy he
felt in his heart ; and when Michol, his wife, re-
proached him for it, as an act of folly, he did not
regret to see himself vilified ; but, continuing in a
true and sincere manifestation of his joy, he testi-
fied that he was glad to be reproached for his God.
Wherefore remember, Philothea, that if, for acts of
a true and sincere devotion, the world shall esteem
you mean, abject, or foolish, humility will make
you rejoice at this happy reproach, the cause of
^vich is not in you, but in those that reproach you.


ON SELF-ABJECTION. 143

CHAPTER VI.

THAT HUMILITY MAKES US LOVE OUR OWN ABJECTION.

^ PROCEED now, and tell you, Philothea, that
A in all, and through all, you should love your
own abjection. But you will ask me what it is to
love your own abjection. In Latin " abjection"
signifies " humility," and " humility " signifies
"abjection"; so that when our Lady, in her
sacred canticle, says, that " all generations should
call her blessed." because our Lord had regarded
the "humility of his handmaid," her meaning is,
that our Lord had graciously looked down on her
abjection, her meanness, and lowliness, to heap his
graces and favors upon her. Nevertheless, there
is a difference between the virtue of "humility"
and our " abjection " ; for our " abjection " is the
lowliness, meanness, and baseness that exists in
us, without our knowledge ; whereas, the virtue
of " humility " is a true knowledge and voluntary
acknowledgment of our abjection. Now, the main
point of this humility consists in being willing,
not only to acknowledge our abjection, but in
loving and delighting in it ; and this, not through
want of courage and generosity, but for the greater
exaltation of the divine Majesty, and holding our
neighbor in greater estimation than ourselves. To
this I exhort you ; andf that you may comprehend
me more clearly, I tell you that among the evils
which we suffer some are abject, and others hon-


144 A DEVOUT LIFE.

orable ; many can easily accommodate themselves
to those evils that are honorable, but scarce any
one to such as are abject. You see a devout old
hermit covered with rags ; every one honors his
tattered habit, and compassionates his sufferings ;
but if a poor tradesman, or a poor gentleman, be
in the like case, the world despises and scoffs at
him ; and thus you see how his poverty is abject.
A religious man receives a sharp reproof from his
superior, or a child from his father, with meekness,
and every one calls this mortification, obedience,
and wisdom ; but should a gentleman or lady
suffer the like from another, and although it were
for the love of God, it is then called cowardice
and want of spirit. Behold, then, here another evil
that is abject. One has a canker in his arm, and
another in his face ; the first has only the disease,
but the other, together with the disease, has con-
tempt, disgrace, and abjection. I say, then, that
we must not only love the evil, which is the duty
of patience, but also embrace the abjection, by
virtue of humility. There are, moreover, virtues
which are abject, and virtues which are honorable.
Patience, meekness, simplicity, and even humility
itself, are virtues which worldlings consider as
mean and abject ; whilst, on the contrary, they
hold prudence, fortitude, and liberality, in the
highest estimation. There are also actions of one
and the same virtue, some of which are despised
and others honored ; to give alms, and forgive in-
juries, are both acts of charity ; yet the first is
honored, whilst the latter is despised in the eyes
of the world. A young gentleman or lady whf


OX SELF ABJECTION. 145

refuses to join in the disorders of a debauched
company, or to talk, play, dance, drink, or dress,
as the rest do, will incur their scorn and censure ;
and their modesty will be termed bigotry or affec-
tation ; to love this is to love our own abjection.

Behold an abjection of another kind. We go
to visit the sick : if I am sent to the most miser-
able, it will be to me an abjection according to the
world, for which reason I will love it. If I am
sent to a person of quality, it is an abjection
according to the spirit, for there is not so much
virtue or merit in it. and therefore I will love this
abjection. One falls in the midst of the street,
and. besides his fall, receives shame ; we must
love this abjection. There are even faults which
have no other ill in them besides abjection ; and
humility does not require that we should deliber-
ately commit them, but that we should not vex
ourselves when we have committed them. Such
are certain follies, incivilities, and inadvertencies,
which as we ought to avoid before they are com-
mitted, for the sake of civility and discretion : so
when they are committed, we ought to be content
with the abjection we meet with, and accept it
willingly, for the sake of practising humility.

I say yet more : should I. through passion or
anger, have spoken any unbecoming words,
wherewith God and my neighbor may have been
offended, I will repent, and be sorry for the of-
fence, and endeavor to make the best reparation
I can, but yet will admit of the abjection, and the
contempt which it has brought upon me : and
could the one be separated from the other, I


146 A DEVOUT LIFE.

would most cheerfully cast away the sin, and
humbly retain the abjection.

But though we love the abjection that follows
the evil, yet we must not neglect, by just and
lawful means, to redress the evil that caused it
especially when it is of consequence ; as, for ex-
ample, should I have some disagreeable disorder
in my face, I will endeavor to have it cured, but
not with the intention of forgetting the abjection
I received by it. If I have been guilty of some
folly, which has given no one offence, I will give
no apology for it ; because, although it were an
offence, yet it is not permanent ; I could not,
therefore, excuse it, but only with a view to rid
myself of the abjection, which would not be
agreeable to humility. But if, through inadver-
tence or otherwise, I should have offended or
scandalized any one, I will repair the offence by
some true excuse ; because the evil is permanent,
and charity obliges me to remove it. Besides, it
sometimes happens that charity requires we should
remove the abjection for the good of our neighbor,
to whom our reputation is necessary ; but in such
a case, though we remove the abjection from
before our neighbor's eyes, to prevent scandal, yet
must we carefully shut it up in our heart for its
edification.

But would you know, Philothea, which are the
best abjections? I tell you plainly, that those
are most profitable to our souls and most accepta-
ble to God which befall us by accident, or by
our condition of life ; because we have not chosen
to em ourselves, but received them as sent by God,


HOW TO PRESERVE A GOOD NAME. 147

whose choice is always better than our own. But
were we to choose any, we should prefer the great-
est, and those are esteemed such as are most
contrary to our inclinations, provided that they be
conformable to our vocation ; for, as I have
already said, our own choice spoils or lessens
almost all our virtues. Oh, who will enable us
to say : " I have chosen to be an abject in tht*
house of God, rather than to dwell in the taber-
nacles of sinners"? — Ps. lxxxiii. 11. Xc>
one certainly, Philothea, but he who, to exalt us,
lived and died in such a manner as to become the
reproach of men, and the abjection of the people.
I have said many things to you which may seem
hard to you in theory, but, believe mo, they will
be more agreeable than sugar or honey when you
put them in practice.


3X*JC


CHAPTER VII.

HOW WE ARE TO PRESERVE OUR GOOD NAME IN THE PRAC-
TICE OF HUMILITY.

JURAISE, honor, and glory are not given to
^^ men for every degree of virtue, but for an
excellence of a virtue ; for by praise we endeavoi
to persuade others to esteem the excellency of
those whom we praise ; by honor we testify that
we ourselves esteem them ; and glory, in my
opinion, is only a certain lustre of reputation that


148 A DEVOUT LITE.

arises from the concurrence of praise and honor,
so that honor and praise are like precious stones,
from a collection of which glory proceeds like a
certain enamelling. Now, humility not enduring
that we should have any opinion of our own excel-
lence, or think ourselves worthy to be preferred
before others, cannot permit that we should seek
after praise, honor, and glory, which are only due
to excellence ; yet she consents to the counsel of
the wise man, who admonishes us to be careful of
our good name (Ecclus. xli. 15), because a good
name is an esteem, not of an excellence, but only
of an ordinary honesty and integrity of life, which
humility does not forbid us either to acknowledge
in ourselves, or to desire the reputation of it. It
is true, humility would despise a good name if
charity did not need it ; but, because it is one of
the foundations of human society, and that without
it we are not only unprofitable, but prejudicial to
the public, by reason of the scandal it would
receive, charity requires, and humility consents,
that we should desire it, and carefully preserve
it.

Moreover, as the leaves, which, in themselvess
are of little or no value, are, nevertheless, necessary,
not only to beautify the tree, but also to preserve
its }roung and tender fruits ; so a good reputation,
which, though of itself not very desirable, is, not-
withstanding, very profitable, not only for the
ornament of life, but also for the preservation of
virtue, especially of those virtues which are as jet
but weak and tender.

The obligation of preserving our reputation, and


HOAV TO PRESERVE A GOOD NAME. 149

of being actually such as we are thought to be,
urges a generous spirit forward with a strong and
agreeable impulse. Let us, then, preserve our
virtues, dear Philothea, because they are acceptable
to God, the sovereign object of all our actions.
But as they who desire to preserve fruits are not
content to cover them with sugar, but also put
them into vessels that are proper to keep them ;
so, although the love of God be the principal pre-
server of our virtues, yet we may further employ
our good name as very profitable for that purpose.

Yet we must not be over-nice in regard to the
preservation of our good name ; for those who are
too tender and sensible in this point are like those
persons who, for every slight indisposition, take
physic, and, thinking to preserve their health,
quite destroy it. Thus, persons, by endeavoring
to maintain their reputation so delicately, entirely
lose it ; for by this tenderness they become whim-
sical, quarrelsome, and insupportable, and thus
provoke the malice of detractors.

The overlooking and despising of an injury or
calumny is, generally speaking, by far a more
effectual remedy than resentment, contention, and
revenge ; for contempt causes them to vanish ;
whereas, if we are angry, we seem to own them.
Crocodiles hurt only those that fear them, and
detraction, those that are vexed by it. An exces-
sive fear of losing our good name betrays a great
distrust of its foundation, which is the truth of a
good life. The inhabitants of towns that have
wooden bridges over great rivers fear lest they
should be carried away by every little Hood, but


150 A DEVOUT LIFE.

they that have bridges of stone only apprehend
extraordinary inundations ; so they that have a
soul solidly grounded on Christian virtue despise
the overflowing of injurious tongues ; but those
that find themselves weak are disturbed with every
discourse. In a word, Philothea, he that is too
anxious to preserve his reputation loses it ; and
that person deserves to lose honor who seeks to
receive it from those whose vices render them truly
infamous and dishonorable.

Reputation is but a sign to point out the resi-
dence of virtue ; it is virtue, then, that must be
preferred in all and through all; wherefore, should
any one call you a hypocrite because you are
devout, or a coward because you have pardoned
an injury, laugh at him; for, although such judg-
ments are passed on us by the weak and foolish,
we must not forsake the path of virtue, even if we
were to lose our reputation, because we must pre-
fer the fruit before the leaves, viz., interior and
spiritual graces before all external goods. It is
lawful to be jealous, but not an idolator of our
reputation ; and, as we should not offend the eyes
of the good, so we must not strive to satisfy those
of the wicked. The beard is an ornament to the
face of a man, and the hair to that of a woman ;
if the beard be plucked from the chin, and tha hair
from the head, it will hardly grow again ; but if
it be only cut, nay, though it be shaved close, it
will soon be renewed, and grow stronger and
thicker than ever; so, although our reputation be
cut, or even shaved by the tongues of detractors,
which David compares to sharp razors, we must


HOW TO PRESERVE A GOOD NAME. 151

not make ourselves uneasy, for it will soon shoot
forth again, not only as fair as before, but much
more firm and durable. But if our vices and
wicked course of life take away our reputation, it
will hardly return, because it is pulled up by the
root ; for the root of a good name are virtue and
probity, which, as long as they remain in us, can
always recover the honor due to it.

If any vain conversation, idle habit, fond love,
or custom of frequenting improper company blast
our reputation, we must forsake these gratifications
because our good name is of more value than such
vain contentments. But if, for the exercise of
piety, the advancement of devotion, or our progress
towards heaven, men grumble, murmur, and speak
evil of us, let us leave these, like curs, to bark at
the moon ; for should they, at any time, be able
to cast an aspersion on our good name, and by
that means cut and shave the beard of our reputa-
tion, it will quickly spring up again, and the razoi
of detraction will be as advantageous to our honor
as the pruning-knife to the vine, which makes it
abound and multiply in fruit.

Let us incessantly fix our eyes on Jesus Christ
crucified, and proceed in his service with ''onfidence
and sincerity, but yet with wisdom and discretion ;
he will be the protector of our reputation ; and,
should he sutler it to be taken from us, it will be
either to restore it with advantage, or to make us
profit in holy humility, one ounce of which is
preferable to ten thousand pounds of honors. Are
we blamed unjustly, let us peaceably oppose truth
against calumny ; does the calumny continue, let


152 A DEVOUT LITE.

as also continue to humble ourselves, resigning
our reputation, together with our soul, into the
hands of God ; we cannot secure it better. Let
us serve God in evil and in good report ( 2 Cor. vi. ) ,
according to the example of St. Paul, that we may
say with David (Ps. xviii.) : "For thy sake, O
Lord, I have borne reproach, and shame hath
covered my face." I except, nevertheless, certain
crimes, so horrid and infamous, that no man ought
to suiter the false imputation of them, if he can
justly acquit himself; and also certain persons, on
whose reputation depends the edification of many ;
for. in these cases, according to the opinion of
divines, we must quietly seek a reparation of the
wrong received.


CHAPTER VIII.

OF MEEKNESS TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOR, AND REMEDIES
AGAINST ANGER

•fjYHE holy chrism, which, by apostolical tradition,
<^s we use in the Church of God for confirmations
and consecrations, is composed of oil of olives
mingled with balm, which, amongst other things,
represents to us the two favorite and well-beloved
virtues which shone forth in the sacred person of
our Lord, and which he has strenuously recom-
mended to us ; as if by them our hearts ought to
be in a particular manner consecrated to his
service, and dedicated +o his imitation. "Learn


MEEKNESS TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOR. 153

of me," says he, "for I am meek and humble of
heart." (Matt. xii. 29.) "Humility" perfects us
with respect to God ; and " meekness," with regard
to our neighbor. The balm, which, as I have
before observed, always sinks beneath all other
liquors, represents humility ; and the oil of olives,
that swims above, represents meekness and mild-
ness, which surmount all things, and excel
amongst virtues, as being the flower of charity,
which, according to St. Bernard, is then in its
perfection, when it is not only patient, but also
meek and mild. But take care, Philothea, that
this mystical chrism, compounded of meekness and
humility, be within your heart, for it is one of the
great artitices of the enemy to make many deceive
themselves with the expressions and exterior ap-
pearance of these two virtues, who, not exam-
ining thoroughly their interior affections, think
themselves to be humble and meek ; whereas, in
effect, there are no virtues to which they have less
pretensions. This may be easily discovered, for,
notwithstanding all their ceremonious mildness
and humility, at the least cross word, or smallest
injury, they exhibit an unparalleled arrogance.
It is said that those who have taken the preserva-
tive which is commonly called "the grace of St.
Paul," do not swell when they are bitten and stung
by a viper, provided the preservative be of the
best sort ; in like manner, when humility and
meekness are good and true, they preserve us
from that swelling and burning heat which injuries
are wont to raise in our hearts. But if, being
stung and bitten by detractors and enemies, we


154 A DEVOUT LIFE.

swell, and are enraged, it is a certain sign that
neither our humility nor meekness is true and
sincere, but only apparent and artificial.

That holy and illustrious patriarch Joseph,
sending back his brethren from Egypt to his
father's house, gave them this only advice : "Be
not angry with one another by the way." Gen. xlv.
29. I say the same to you, Philothea ; this wretched
life is but a journey to the happy life to come ;
let us not, then, be angry with each other by the
way, but rather march on with the troop of our
brethren and companions meekly, peaceably, and
lovingly ; nay, I say to you, absolutely and with-
out exception, be not angry at all if it be possible,
and admit no pretext whatsoever to open the gate
of your heart to so destructive a passion ; for St.
James tells us positively, and without reservation,
"The anger of man works not the j-ustice of God."
St. James ii. 20. We must, indeed, resist evil, and
restrain the vices of those that are under our
charge constantly and courageously, but yet with
meekness and compassion. Nothing so soon
appeases the enraged elephant as the sight of *.
little lamb, and nothing so easily breaks the forct
of a cannon-shot as wool. We do not value so
much the correction which proceeds from passion,
though it be accompanied with reason, as that
which proceeds from reason alone ; for the reasona-
ble soul, being naturally subject to reason, is
never subject to passion but through tyranny ;
and, therefore, when reason is accompanied by
passion, she makes herself odious, her just
government being debased by the fellowship of


MEEKNESS TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOR. 15^

tyranny. Princes do honor to their people, and
make them rejoice exceedingly, when they visit
them with a peaceable train ; but when they come
at the head of armies, though it be for the common
good, their visits are always disagreeable; for
although they cause military discipline to be
rigorously observed among their soldiers, yet they
can never do it so effectually but that some disor-
ders will always happen, by which the peasant
will be a sufferer. In like manner, as long as
reason rules, and peaceably exercises chastise-
ments, corrections, and reprehensions, although
severely and exactly, every one loves and approves
it; but when she brings anger, passion, and rage,
which St. Austin calls her soldiers, along with
her, she rather makes herself feared than loved,
and even her own disordered heart is always the
sufferer. "It is better," says the same St. Austin,
writing to Profuturus, " to deny entrance to just
and reasonable anger, than to admit to it, be it
ever so little ; because, being once admitted, it is
with difficulty driven out again ; for it enters as a
little twig, and in a moment becomes a beam ; and
if it can but once gain the night of us, and the sun
set upon it, which the apostle forbids, it turns into
a hatred, from which we have scarce any means to
rid ourselves ; for it nourishes itself under a thou-
sand false pretexts, since there was never an angry
man that thought this anger unjust.

It is better, then, to attempt to find the way
to live without anger, than pretend to make a
moderate and discreet use of it ; and when, through
our imperfections and frailty, we find ourselves


156 A DEVOUT LIFE.

surprised, it is better to drive it away speedily
than enter into a parley ; for, if we give it ever so
little leisure, it will become mistress of the place,
like the serpent, who easily draws in his whole
bod}r where he can once get in his head.

But how shall I banish it? you may say.
You must, my dear Philothea, at the first alarm,
speedily muster your forces ; not violently, not
tumultuously, but mildly, and yet seriously; for
as we hear the ushers in public halls and courts
of justice crying Silence, make more noise than
the whole assembly ; so it frequently happens
that, by endeavoring with violence to restrain our
anger, we stir up more trouble in our heart than
wrath has excited before ; and the heart, being
thus agitated, can be no longer master of itself.
After this meek effort practise the advice which
St. Austin, in his old age, gave the young bishop
Auxilius. Do, says he, that which a man should
do, if that befall you of which the man of God
speaks in the Psalms : " My eye is troubled with
wrath." Ps. xxx. Have recourse to God, crying
out, " Have mercy on me, O Lord ! " that he may
stretch forth his right hand to repress your anger.
I mean we must invoke the assistance of God,
when we find ourselves excited to wrath, in imi-
tation of the apostles when they were tossed by
the wind and the stonn upon the waters ; for he
will command our passions to cease, and a great
calm shall ensue. But the prayer which is
made against present and pressing anger must
always be performed calmly, and not violently ;
^nd they must be observed in all the remedies


MEEKNESS TOWARDS OUR NEIGHBOR. 157

against this evil. Moreover, as soon as ever
you perceive yourself guilty of an act of wrath,
repair the fault immediately, by an act of meek-
ness towards the same person against whom you
were angry. For, as it is a sovereign remedy
against a lie, to contradict it upon the spot, as
soon as we perceive we have told it, so we must
repair anger instantly by a contrary act of meek-
ness ; for fresh wounds are most easily cured.

Again, when your mind is in a state of tran-
quillity, supply yourself with meekness, speaking
all 3^0111* words, and doing all your actions, little
and great, in the mildest manner possible, calling
to mind, that as the Spouse in the Canticles has
not only honey in her lips, on her tongue, and in
her breast, but milk also, so we must not only
have our words sweet towards our neighbor, but
also our whole breast ; that is to say, the whole
interior of our soul ; neither must we have the
aromatic and fragrant sweetness of honey only,
viz., the sweetness of civil conversation with
strangers, but also the sweetness of milk amongst
our family and neighbors ; in which those greatly
fail, who in the street seem to be angels, and in
their houses demons.


158 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER IX.

OF MEEKNESS TOWARDS OURSELVES.


fjllENE of the best exercises of meekness we can
^^ perform is that of which the subject is
within ourselves, in never fretting at our own
imperfections, for though reason requires that we
should be sorry when we commit any fault, yet
we must refrain from that bitter, gloomy, spiteful,
and passionate displeasure, for which many are
greatly to blame, who, being overcome by anger,
are angry for having been angry, and vexed to see
themselves vexed ; for by this means they keep
their heart perpetually steeped in passion; and,
though it seems as if the second anger destroyed
the first, it serves, nevertheless, to open a passage
for fresh anger on the first occasion that shall
present itself. Besides, this anger and vexation
against ourselves tend to pride, and flow from no
other source than self-love, which is troubled and
disquieted to see itself imperfect. We must be
displeased at our faults, but in a peaceable, set-
tled, and firm manner ; for, as a judge punishes
malefactors much more justly when he is guided
in his decisions by reason, and proceeds with the
spirit of tranquillity, than when he acts with
violence and passion (because, judging in passion,
he does not punish the faults according to their
enormity, but according to his passion), so we
correct ourselves much better by a calm and


MEEKNESS TOWARDS OURSELVES. 15 V

steady repentance, than by that which is harsh,
turbulent, and passionate ; for repentance exer-
cised with violence proceeds not according to
the quality of our faults, but according to our in-
clinations. For example, he that affects chastity
will vex himself beyond all bounds at the least
fault he commits against that virtue, and will but
laugh at a gross detraction he shall have been
guilty of; on the other hand, he that hates de-
traction torments himself for a slight murmur,
and makes no account of a gross fault committed
against chastity ; and so of others. Now, all this
springs from this source, that these men, in the
judgment of their conscience, are not guided by
reason, but by passion.

Believe me, Philothea, as the mild and affec-
tionate reproofs of a father have far greater power
to reclaim his child than rage and passion ; so
when we have committed any fault, if we repre-
hend our heart with mild and calm remonstrances,
having more compassion for it than passion
against it, sweetly encouraging it to amendment,
the repentance it shall conceive by this means
will sink much deeper, and penetrate it more
effectually, than a fretful, injurious, and stormy
repentance.

If, for example, I had formed a strong resolu-
tion not to yield to the sin of vanity, and yet had
fallen into it, I would not reprove my heart after
this manner : "Art thou not wretched and abomi-
nable, that, after so many resolutions, hast suf-
fered thyself to be thus carried away by vanity ?
Die with shame ; lift up no more thy eyes to


160 A DEVOUT LIFE.

heaven, blind, impudent traitor as thou art, a
rebel to thy God ; " but I would correct it thus,
rationally saying, by way of compassion : " Alas,
my poor heart, behold we are fallen into the pit
we had so firmly resolved to avoid ! "Well, let us
rise again, and quit it forever ; let us call upon
the mercy of God, and hope that it will assist us
to be more constant for the time to come, and let
us enter again the path of humility. Let us be en-
couraged ; let us from this day be more upon our
guard ; God will help us ; we shall do better ; "
and on this reprehension I would build a firm and
constant resolution never more to relapse into
that fault, using the proper means to avoid it by
the advice of my director.

However, if airy one should find his heart not
sufficiently moved with this mild manner of rep-
rehension, he may use one more sharp and severe,
to excite it to deeper confusion, provided that he
afterwards closes up all his grief and anger with
a sweet and consoling confidence in God, in imita-
tion of that illustrious penitent, who, seeing his
soul afflicted, raised it up in this manner, Ps.
xliii. 5 : f? Why art thou sad, O my soul, and
why dost thou disquiet me? Hope in God, for I
will still give praise to him, who is the salvation
of my countenance, and my God."

Raise up your heart, then, again whenever it
falls, but fairly and softly; humbling yourself
before God, through the knowledge of your own
misery, but without being surprised at your fall,
for it is no wonder that weakness should be weak,
or misery wretched : detest, nevertheless, with all


AGAINST AXXIETY AND SOLICITUDE. 161

four power, the offence God has received from
you, and return to 3'our way of virtue, which you
had forsaken, with great courage and confidence
in his mercy.


3>^«


CHAPTER X.

THAT WE MUST TREAT OF OUR AFFAIRS WITH DILIGENCE, BUT WITH.
OUT EAGERNESS OR SOLICITUDE.

TjTliE care and diligence with which we should
^^ attend to our concerns must never be con-
founded with anxiety and solicitude. The angels
are careful of our salvation, and procure it with
diligence, yet they are never agitated by anxiety
and solicitude ; for care and diligence naturally
result from their charity, whereas solicitude and
anxiety are utterly incompatible with their fe-
licity ; because the former may be accompanied
by a calm and tranquil state of mind, whereas
the latter never can.

Be careful and attentive, then, O Philothea !
to all those affairs which God has committed to
your care, for such a disposition in you is agree-
able to the will of his divine Majesty, without
suffering your care and attention to degenerate
into inquietude or anxiety ; be not flurried about
them, for an over-solicitude disturbs the reason
and judgment, and prevents us from doing that
properly for the execution of Avhich we are so
eao-er and anxious.


162 A DEVOUT LIFE.

When our Lord reprehended Martha, he said :
" Martha, Martha, thou art solicitous, and art
troubled about many things. You must here
observe, that she would not have been "troubled,"
had she been but merely diligent ; but, being
over-concerned and disquieted, she hurried fold
troubled herself, and therefore received this rep-
rehension from our Lord. As rivers, that fiow
slowly through the plains, bear large boats and
rich merchandise ; and the rain, which falls gently
in the open fields, makes them fruitful in grass and
corn ; or, as torrents and rivers, which run
rapidly, and overflow the grounds, ruin the
bordering country, and render it unprofitable foj
culture ; so, in like manner, vehement and tem-
pestuous rains spoil the fields and meadows.
That work is never well executed which is done
with too much eagerness and hurry. We must listen
leisurely, according to the proverb. " He that is
in haste," says Solomon, Prov. xix. 2, "is in
danger of stumbling." We perforin our actions
soon enough when we perforin them well. As
drones, although they make more noise, and are
more eager at work than bees, make only wax,
and no honey, so they that hurry themselves with
a tormenting anxiety, and eager solicitude, never
do much, and the little they do perform is never
very profitable.

As flies do not trouble us by their strength, but
by their multitudes, so affairs of importance give
us not so much trouble as trifling ones, when they
are in great number. Undertake, then, all your
affairs with a calm and peaceable mind, and en-


AGAINST ANXIETY AND SOLICITUDE. 163

deavor to despatch them in order, one after an-
other ; for, if you make an effort to do them all at
once, or in disorder, your spirit will be so over-
charged and depressed, that it will probably sink
under the burden without effecting anything.

In all your affairs rely wholly on Divine Provi-
dence, through which alone you must look for
success ; labor, nevertheless, quietly on your
part, to cooperate with its designs, and then you
may be assured, if you trust, as you ought, in
God, the success which shall come to you shall
be always that which is the most profitable for
you, whether it appear good or bad, according
to your private judgment. Imitate little chil-
dren, who, as they with one hand hold fast by
their father, with the other gather strawberries or
blackberries along the hedges ; so you, gathering
and handling the goods of this world with one
hand, must with the other always hold fast the
hand of your heavenly Father, turning yourself
towards him, from time to time, to see if your
actions or occupations be pleasing to him ; but,
above all things, take heed that you never leave
his protecting hand, nor think to gather more;
for, should he forsake you, you will not be able to
go a step further without falling to the ground.
My meaning is, Philothea, that amidst those or-
dinary affairs and occupations, that require not so
earnest an attention, you should look more on
God than on them ; and when they are of such
importance as to require your whole attention,
that then, also, you should look, from time to time,
towards God, like mariners, who., to arrive at tie


i64 A DEVOUT LIFE.

port to which they are bound, look more up
towards heaven than down on the sea on which
they sail ; thus will God work with you, in }rou,
and for you, and your labor shall be followed witi
consolation.

CHAPTER XI.

OF OBEDIENCE.

jf^HARITY alone can place us in perfection, but
^^obedience, chastity, and poverty, are the three
principal means to attain to it. Obedience con-
secrates our heart ;: chastity, our body ; and poverty,
our means, to the love and service of God. These
three branches of the spiritual cross are grounded
on a fourth, viz., humility. I shall say nothing of
these three virtues, as they are solemnly vowed,
because this subject concerns the religious only ;
nor even as they are simply vowed : for though a
vow gives many graces and merits to virtues, yet,
to make us perfect, it is not necessary they should
be vowed, provided they be observed. For though
being vowed, and especially solemnly, they place
a man in the state of perfection ; yet to arrive
at perfection itself, it suffices that they be ob-
served : there being a material difference betwixv
the state of perfection and perfection itself; since
all bishops and religious are in the state of per-
fection ; and yet, alas ! all are not arrived at
perfection itself, as is too plainly tc be seen


OF OBEDIENCE. 165

Let us endeavor, then, Philothea, to practise well
these virtues, each one according to his vocation ;
for though they do not place us in the state of
perfection, yet they will make us perfect ; and,
indeed, every one is obliged to practise them,
though not all after the sime manner.

There are two sorts of obedience, the one nec-
essary, the other voluntary. By that which is
necessary, you must obey your ecclesiastical
superiors, as the Pope, the Bishop, the Parish
Priest, and such as are commissioned by them ; as
also your civil superiors, such as your Prince,
and the magistrates he has established for admin-
istering justice ; and, finally, your domestic su-
periors, viz., your father and mother, master and
mistress. Now, this obedience is called necessary,
because no mar can exempt himself from the
duty of obeying his superiors, God having placed
them in authority to command and govern, each
in the department that is assigned to him. You
must, then, of necessity obey their commands ; but,
to be perfect, follow their counsels also, nay, even
their desires and inclinations, so far as charity and
discretion will permit. Obey them when they ordei
that which is agreeable, as to eat, or to take your
recreation ; for though there seems no great virtue
to obey on such occasions, yet it would be a
great vice to disobey. Obey them in things
indifferent, as to wear this or that dress ; to go
one way or another; to sing or to be silent; and
this will be a very commendable obedience. Obey
them in things hard, troublesome, and disagreeable ;
and thip will be a perfect obedience. Obey, in


166 A DEVOUT LIFE.

fine, meekly, without reply ; readily, without
dela}' ; cheerfully, without repining ; and, above all,
obey lovingly, for the love of him, who, through
his love for us, made himself obedient unto death,
even to the death of the cross, and who, as St.
Bernard says, rather chose to part with his life
than his obedience.

That you may learn effectually to obey your
superiors, condescend easily to the will of your
equals, yielding to their opinions m what is not sin.
without being contentious or obstinate. Accommo-
date yourself cheerfully to the desires of you?
inferiors, as far as reason will permit ; nevei
exercise an imperious authority over them so long
as they are good. It is an illusion to believe that
we should obey with ease if we were religious,
when we feel ourselves so backward and stubborn
in what regards obedience to those whom God has
placed ovei us.

We call that obedience voluntary to which we
oblige ourselves by our own choice, and which is
not imposed on us by another. YVe do not com-
monly choose our prince, our bishop, our father
or mother ; and even wives, many times, do not
choose their husbands ; but we choose our con-
fessor and director. H, then, in choosing we make
a vow to obey, as the holy mother Terexa did, who,
as has been already observed, besides her obe-
dience, solemnly vowed to the superior of her
order, bound herself by a simple vow, to obey
father Gratian ; or if, without a vow Ave dedicate
ourselves to the obedience of any one, this obe-
dience is always called voluntary, on account of


ON CHASTITY. 1S7

its being grounded on our own free will and
choice.

We must obey every one of our superiors,
according to the charge he has over us. In
political matters we must obey our prince ; in
ecclesiastical, our prelates ; in domestic, our father,
master, or husband ; and, in what regards the
private conduct of the soul, our ghostly father, or
director.

Request your ghostly father to order you all
the actions of piety you are to perform, in order
that they may acquire a double value ; the one of
themselves, because they are works of piety ; the
other of obedience to his commands, and in virtue
of which they are performed. Happy are the
obedient, for God will never suffer them to go-
astray.

CHAPTER XIL

OF THE NECESSITY OF CHASTITY.

SjpHASTITY, the lily of virtues, makes men
*^) almost equal to angels. Nothing is beautiful
but what is pure, and the purity of men is chastity.
Chastity is called honesty, and the possession of
it honor ; it is also named integrity, and the
opposite, vice, corruption. In short, it has its
peculiar glory, to be the fair and unspotte^ virtue
of both soul and body.

It is nevei lawful to draw an impure pleasure


168 A DEVOUT LIFE.

from our bodies in any manner whatsoevei, ex-
cept in lawful marriage, the sanctity of which
may, by a just compensation, repair the damage
we receive in that delectation ; and yet, even in
marriage itself, the honesty of the intention must
be observed, to the end that, if there be any
indecency in the pleasure that is taken, there
may be nothing but honesty in the will that
takes it.

The chaste heart is like the mother-pearl, that
can receive no drop of water but such as comes
from heaven ; for it can accept of no pleasure
but that of marriage, which is ordained from
heaven ; out of which it is not allowed so much
as to think of it, so as to take a voluntary and
deliberate delight in the thought.

For the first degree of this virtue, Philothea,
beware of admitting any kind of forbidden pleas-
are, as all those are which are taken out of, or
even in, marriage, when they are taken contrary
to the rule of marriage. For the second, refrain
as much as is possible from all unprofitable and
superfluous delights, although lawful and per-
mitted. For the third, set not your affection on
pleasures and delights which are ordained and
commanded ; for though we must take these de-
lectations that are necessary, I mean tho>e which
concern the end and institution of holy matrimony,
yet we must never set our heart and mind upon
them.

As to the rest, every one stands in great need
of this virtue. They that are in the state of
^dowhood ouorht to have a courageous chast?t»-'.


ON CHASTITY. lOV

to despise not only present or future objects, but
to resist also the impure imaginations which for-
mer pleasures, lawfully received in marriage, may
produce in their minds, which on this account
are more susceptible of unclean allurements. For
this cause St. Austin admires the purity of his
friend Alipius, who had wholly forgotten and
despised the pleasures of the tlesh, of which,
nevertheless, he had some experience in his youth.

In effect, as when fruits are entire and sound,
they may be preserved, some in straw, some in
sand, and some in their own leaves, but being
once cut or bruised, it is almost impossible to
preserve them but by honey and sugar, in the
form of sweetmeats ; so untainted chastity may
many ways be kept ; but, after it has once been
violated, nothing can preserve it but an extraor-
dinary devotion, which, as I have often repeated,
is the true honey and sugar of the spirit.

Virgins have need of a chastity extremely
sincere, nice, and tender, to banish from their
hearts all sorts of curious thoughts, and to de-
spise, with an absolute contempt, all sorts of un-
clean pleasures ; which in truth deserve not to
be desired by men, since they are better enjoyed
by swine. Let, then, these pure souls be careful
never to doubt but that chastity is incomparably
better than all that which is incompatible with
it ; for, as the great St. Jerome says, the enemy
violently tempts virgins to desire to make a trial
of these pleasures, representing them as infinitely
more agreeable and delightful than indeed they
are, which often troubles them very much, whilst,


170 A DEVOUT LIFE.

as this holy father says, they esteem that more
sweet of which they know nothing.

For as the little butterfly, seeing the flame,
hovers with a curiosity about it, to try whether
it be as sweet as it is fair, and, being borne away
with this fancy, ceases not till it is destroyed at
the very first trial ; so young people suffer them-
selves frequently to be so possessed with the
false and foolish opinion they have formed of
the pleasure of voluptuous desire, that after
many curious thoughts they at length ruin them-
selves, and perish in the flames ; more foolish in
this than the butterflies, for these have some
cause to imagine that the fire is sweet, because it
is so beautiful ; but those knowing that which
they seek to be extremely dishonest, cease not,
nevertheless, to set a value on that brutish pleasure.

But as for those who are married, it is most
true, though the vulgar cannot conceive it, that
chastity is very necessary, also, for them ; because,
in respect of them, it consists not in abstaining
absolutely from carnal pleasures, but in contain-
ing themselves in the midst of pleasures. Now
as this commandment, Be angry and sin not,
is, in my opinion, more difficult to be observed
than this, Be not angry; and as one may more
easily abstain from anger than regulate it ; so it
is easier to keep ourselves altogether from car-
nal pleasures than to preserve a moderation in
them. It is true, that the holy liberty of mar-
riage has a particular force to extinguish the
fire of concupiscence ; but the frailty of them
that enjoys this liberty passes easily from per


ON CHASTITT. 171

mission to dissolution, and from use to abuse ;
and as we see many rich men steal, not through
want but avarice, so also we may observe many
married people fall into excess by mere intem-
perance and incontinency, notwithstanding the
lawful object to which they ought and might
confine themselves ; their concupiscence being
like wildfire, which runs burning here and there,
without resting in any one place. It is always
dangerous to take violent medicines, for if we
take more than we should, or if they be not well
prepared, they may be attended with fatal con-
sequences. Marriage was blessed and ordained
in part as a remedy for concupiscence, and,
doubtless, it is a very good remedy, but yet
violent, and consequently very dangerous, if it
be not used with discretion,

I add, that the variety of human affairs, be-
sides long diseases, oftentimes separates husbands
from their wives ; and therefore married people
have need of two kinds of chastity : the one for
absolute abstinence, when they are separated
upon the occasions of which I have been speak-
ing ; the other for moderation, when they are
together in the ordinary course. St. Catharine
of Sienna saw, amongst the damned, many souls
grievously tormented for having violated the sanc-
tity of marriage, which happened, said she, not
for the enormity of the sin, for murders and blas-
phemies are more enormous, but because they that
commit it make no conscience of it, and thereof
continue long in it.

You see, then, that chastity is necessary for all


172 A DEVOUT LIFE.

classes of people : " Follow peace with all men,"
says the Apostle, "and holiness, without which no
man shall see God ; " by holiness is here under-
stood " chastity " ; as St. Jerome and St. Chrysos-
tom observe. Xo, Philothea, no one shall see God
without chastity ; no one shall dwell in his holy
tabernacle, that is not clean of heart ; and, as our
Saviour himself says, Apoc. xxii. 15, "Dogs and
the unchaste shall be banished thence," and "Blessed
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God." St.
Matt, v. 8.

CHAPTER XIII.

ADVICE HOW TO PRESERVE CHASTITY.

T^E exceedingly diligent in turning yourself from
*£* all the approaches and allurements of inconti-
nency : for this evil works insensibly, and, from
small beo'innin^s, advances to 2'reat accidents,
which are always more easy to avoid than to cure.
Human bodies are like glasses, which cannot be
carried, when they touch one another, without
danger of being broken, or like fruits which,
though ever so sound and seasonable, yet by
touching one another are impaired. Water itself,
in a vessel, be it ever so fresh, being once touched
by any beast of the earth, cannot long retain its
freshness. Never suffer any one, Philothea. to
touch you uncivilly, either through play or love ;
for though perhaps chastity may be preserved in


HOW TO PRESERVE CHASTITY. 173

those actions which are rather light than lewd, yet
the freshness and flower of chastity always re-
ceive some detriment and loss ; but to suffer your-
self to be touched immodestly is the utter ruin of
chastity.

Chastity depends on the heart as its source, yet
regards the body as its subject ; and therefore it
may be lost as well by the exterior senses of the
body as the interior thoughts and desires of the
heart. It is impurity to behold, to hear, to speak,
to smell, or touch any immodest thing in which
the heart entertains itself, and takes pleasure. St.
Paul says positively, " Let not fornication be so
much as once named amongst you."

The bees not only have an aversion to carrion,
but avoid and hate extremely all sorts of stench
svhich proceed from it. The sacred Spouse, in the
Canticles, has her hands distilling myrrh, which is
the antidote against corruption ; her lips are bound
up with, a scarlet ribbon, the mark of her modesty
in her words ; she has the eyes of a dove, by
reason of her cleanness ; her ears have gold ear-
rings, in token of their purity ; her nose is amongst
the cedars of Lebanon, which are incorruptible
wood ; such ought to be the devout soul : chaste,
clean, and pure, in hands, lips, ears, eyes, and in
all her body.

To this purpose I will remind you of an ex-
pression which the ancient father John Cassian
relates, as coming from the mouth of the great St.
Basil, who, speaking of himself, said one day : "I
know not what belongs to a woman, yet I am not
a virgin. Certainly chastity may be lost as niairy


174 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ways as there are kinds of immodesty and wanton-
ness ; so that, according as they are great or little,
some weaken it, others wound it, and others de-
stroy it entirely. There are certain indiscreet and
sensual familiarities and passions, which, to speak
properly, do not destroy chastity, and yet they
weaken it, leave it languishing, and stain its beau-
tiful Avhiteness. There are other familiarities and
passions not only indiscreet, but vicious ; not only
fond, but dishonest; not only sensual, but carnal;
and by these chastity is at least grievously wounded.
I say, at least; because it dies by them, and
perishes altogether, when these fooleries and wan-
ton dalliances cause in the flesh the utmost effect
of impure delight ; for then chastity perishes in
a more unworthy, more wicked, more wretcheJ
manner than when it is lost by fornication, or even
by adultery and incest ; since these latter kinds of
filthiness are but sins, but the former, as Tertullia^
says in his book of Chastity, are monsters of iniq-
uity and sin. Now, neither does Cassian believe,
nor do I believe myself, that St. Basil spoke of any
such disorder, when he accused himself of not be-
ing a virgin ; but I am of opinion that he only
said this in relation to pleasure in evil thoughts,
which, though they had not defiled his body, yet
had contaminated the purity of which generous
souls are exceedingly jealous.

Frequent not the company of immodest persons,
especially if they be also impudent, as is generally
the case ; for as when goats touch the sweet al-
mond trees with their tongues, they make them
become bitter : so these corrupted souls and in


POVERTY OF SPIRIT. 175

fected hearts scarcely speak to any, either of the
same or a different sex, without causing them to
fall in some degree from purity ; they have poison
in their eyes and in their breath, like basilisks.
On the contrary, keep company with the chaste
and virtuous ; often meditate upon and read holy
things ; for the word of God is chaste, and makes
those also chaste that delight in it ; which made
David compare it to the Topaz, — a precious stone
which has the property of assuaging the heat of
concupiscence.

Keep yourself always near to Jesus Christ
crucified, both spiritually by meditation, and
really by the holy communion. For as they who
lie on the herb called agnus castas become chaste
and modest ; so you, laying down your heart to
rest upon our Lord, who is the true, chaste, and
immaculate Lamb, shall see that your soul and
your heart shall soon be cleansed from all the
defilements.


CHAPTER XIV.

OF POVERTY OF SPIRIT TO BE OBSERVED IN THE MIDST OF
RICHES.

J^LESSED are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
*^ the kingdom of heaven." Matt. v. 3. Cursed,
then, are the rich in spirit, for the misery of hell is
their portion. He is rich in spirit who has riches
in his spirit, or his spirit in riches ; he is poor in


176 A DEVOUT LIFE.

spirit who has no riches in his spirit, nor his
spirit in riches. The halcyons form their nest like
an apple, and leave only a little opening at the top :
they build them on the sea-shore, and make them so
firm and impenetrable that, although the waves
surprise them, the waters never can get into them,
but, keeping always firm, they remain in the midst
of the sea, upon the sea and masters of the sea.
Your heart, dear Philothea, ought to be in this
manner open only to heaven, and impenetrable to
riches and all transitory things. Whatever portion
of them you may possess, keep your heart free
from the least affection towards them ; keep it
always above them, and amidst riches let it hold
them in contempt, and be the master of riches.
Do not suffer this heavenly spirit to be the captive
of earthly goods ; let it be aways their master, but
never their slave.

There is a material difference between having
poison and being poisoned ; as apothecaries have
almost all kinds of poisons for use, on several
occasions, and yet are not poisoned ; because they
have not poison in their bodies, but in their store :
so you may possess riches without being poisoned
with them, if you keep them in your house or
purse, and not in your heart. To be rich in
effect and poor in affection is the great happiness
of a Christian ; for by this means he has the
benefit of riches for this world, and the merit of
poverty for the world to come.

Alas ! Philothea, no one ever acknowledge.*
himself to be covetous ; every one disavows thai
base and mean passion : every one excuses himself


POVERTY OF SPIRIT. 177

on account of the charge of children, which
oppresses him, and on that wisdom which requires
that men should establish themselves in the world ;
he never has too much ; some pretence is always
found to procure more ; nay, the most covetous
not only deny they are avaricious, but even think
in their conscience they are not so. Covetousness
is a malignant fever, which makes itself so much
the more insensible, by how much the more violent
and ardent it is. Moses saw the sacred tire which
burned the bush, and yet did not consume it ; but
this profane fire of avarice, on the contrary,
consumes and devours the covetous person, and
yet does not burn him, for, in the midst of the most
violent heats of his avarice, he boasts of the most
agreeable coolness in the world, and esteems his
insatiable drought to be a natural and and pleasing
thirst.

If you have a longing desire to possess the
goods which you have not, though you may say
you would not possess them unjustly, you are,
nevertheless, truly covetous. He that has a long-
ing, ardent, and restless desire to drink, although
he would drink nothing but water, is certainly
feverish.

O Philothea ! I know not whether it be a jus-
tifiable desire to wish to have that justly which
another justly possesses ; for it seems by this desire
we should serve our own convenience to the
prejudice of another. If a man possesses any-
thing justly, has he not more reason to keep it
justly than we to desire it justly? Why, then, do
we extend our desires to his possessions, to de


178 A DEVOUT LIFE.

prive him of them ? At the best, if this desire be
just, it certainly is not charitable ; for we would
not, in any case, that another man should desire,
although justly, that which we have a desire to keep
justly. This was the sin of Achad, who desired
to have Naboth's vineyard justly, which Naboth
much more justly desired to keep ; Achad desired
with an ardent and impatient desire, and therefore
offended God.

It is time enough, dear Philothea, to desire your
neighbor's goods when he is desirous to part with
them ; for then his desire will make yours not only
just, but charitable also ; for I am willing you
should take care to increase your wealth, provided
it may be done, not only justly, but with peace
and charity.

If you have a strong attachment to the goods
you possess, if you be too solicitous about them,
set your heart on them, have them always in your
thoughts, and fear the loss of them with a sensible
apprehension, believe me you are still feverish ;
for they that have a fever drink the water that is
given them with a certain eagerness of attention
and satisfaction which the healthy are not accus-
tomed to have. It is impossible to take much
pleasure in laughing without having an extraor-
dinary affection for it.

If, when you suffer loss of goods, you find your
heart disconsolate, believe me, Philothea, you have
too great an affection for them ; for nothing can be
a stronger proof thereof than your affliction for
their loss.

Desire not, then, with a full and express desire.


PRACTICAL POVERTY. 179

the wealth which you have not, and do not place
your affection on that which 3rou have ; grieve not
for the losses which may befall you, and then you
shall have some reason to believe that, though
rich in effect, you are not so in affection, but rather
poor in spirit, and consequently blessed, because
the kingdom of heaven belongs to you.


>x*<


CHAPTER XV.


HOW TO PRACTISE TRUE AND REAL POVERTY, BEING, NOTWITH-
STANDING, REALLY RICH.


D


;HE painter, Parrhasius, painted the people of
Athens in a very ingenious manner, represent-
ing their several variable dispositions, — choleric,
unjust, inconstant, courteous, gentle, merciful,
haughty, proud, humble, resolute, and timorous,
and all this together. But I, dear Philothea,
would infuse into your heart riches and poverty,
a great care and a great contempt of temporal
things.

Be more careful than worldly men are, to make
your goods profitable and fruitful. Are not the
gardeners of great princes more careful and diligent
in cultivating and embellishing the gardens com-
mitted to their charge than if they were their own ?
And why? Because they consider them as the
gardens of kings and princes, to whom they desire
to make themselves acceptable by their services.


180 A DEVOUT LIFE.

Philothea, our possessions are not our own, but
were lent us by God to cultivate, and it is his will
that we should render them fruitful and profitable,
and therefore we do him an agreeable service in
being careful of them ; but then it must be a
greater and more solid care than that which
worldlings have of their goods ; for they laboi
only for love of themselves, but we must laboj
for the love of God. Now, as self-love is violent,
turbulent and impetuous, so the care which pro-
ceeds from it is full of trouble, uneasiness, and
disquiet ; and as the love of God is sweet, peaceable,
and calm, so the care which proceeds from this love,
although it be for worldly goods, is yet amiable,
.sweet, and agreeable. Let us, then, exercise this
peaceable care of preserving, nay, of even
increasing, our temporal goods, whenever just
occasions shall present themselves, and as far as
our condition requires, for God desires us to do
so through love of him.

Bat beware lest self-love deceive you ; for
sometimes it counterfeits the love of God so closely
that one would imagine it to be the same. Now,
that it may not deceive you, and that the care of
your temporal goods may not degenerate into
covetousness, besides what I said in the former
chapter, we must practise a real poverty in the
midst of all the riches that God has given us.

Deprive yourself, then, frequently of some part
of your property, by bestowing it on the poor with
a willing heart ; for to give away what we have
is to impoverish ourselves in proportion as we
give ; and the more we give the poorer we become.


PRACTICAL POVERTY. 181

It is true, God will repay us not only in the next
world, but even in this ; for nothing makes us so
prosperous in this world as alms ; but till such
time as God shall restore it to us we remain so
much the poorer by as much as we have given.
Oh, how holy and rich is that poverty which is
occasioned by giving alms !

Love the poor and poverty, and you shall become
Truly poor, since, as the Scripture says, "we are
made like the things which we love.'' Love
makes the lovers equal. "Who is weak," saith
St. Paul, "with whom I am not weak? He might
have likewise said, Who is poor, with whom I am
not poor? For love made him resemble those
whom he loved; if, aen, you love the poor you
shall be truly a partaker of their poverty, and
poor like them. Now, if you love the poor, be
often in their company, be glad to see them in
your house, and to visit them in theirs ; converse
willingly with them, be pleased to have them neai'
you in the church, in the streets, and elsewhere.
Be poor in conversing with them, speaking to
them as their companion ; but be rich in assisting,
by imparting your goods to them, since you have
more abundance.

Besides, Philothea, content not yourself to be
as poor, but poorer than the poor themselves ;
but how may this be effected? The servant is
lower than his master ; make yourself, then, a
servant of the poor ; go and serve them in their
beds when they are sick ; serve them with your
own hands ; prepare their food for them yourself,
and at your own expense ; be their sempstress


182 A DEVOUT LIFE.

and laundress. O Philothea ! this service is more
glorious than a kingdom.

I cannot sufficiently admire the ardor with which
this counsel was practised by St. Lewis, one of
the greatest kings that ever graced a throne ; great
in every kind of greatness. He frequently served
at table the poor whom he maintained, and caused
three poor men to dine with him almost every day,
and many times ate the remainder of their food
with an incomparable love. When he visited the
hospitals, which he frequently did, he commonly
served the leprous, ulcerous, and such as had the
most loathsome diseases, kneeling on the ground,
respecting in their persons the Saviour of the
world, and cherishing them as tenderly as any
fond mother cherishes her child. St. Elizabeth,
daughter of the king of Hungary, often visited
the poor, and, for her recreation, sometimes
clothed herself like a poor woman among her
ladies, saying to them, "If I were poor I would
dress in this maimer." Good God, Philothea,
how poor were this prince and princess in the
midst of their riches, and how rich in their pov-
erty ! Blessed are they who are poor in this
manner, for to them belongs the kingdom of heaven.
rf I was hungry, and you gave me to eat ; I was
naked, and you clothed me ; come, possess the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world," he who is the King of the poor, as
well as of kings, will say, when he addresses
himself to the elect at the day of general judg-
ment.

There is no one, who, on some occasion or other,


PRACTICAL POVERTY. 183

does not feel a want of some eonveniency. Some-
times we receive a visit from a guest, whom we would
entertain very well, but at present have not the
means ; at other times, our best clothes are in one
place when we want them in another, where we
must be seen. Again, sometimes all the wines in
our cellar ferment and turn, so that there remain
only those that are bad or green ; at another time
we happen to stop at some poor village, where all
things are wanting ; where we have neither bed,
chamber, table, nor attendance ; in line, it is very
often easy to suffer the want of something, be
we ever so rich. Now, this is to be poor in
effect, with regard to the things we want. Philo-
thea, rejoice on these occasions, accept them with
a good heart, and suffer them cheerfully.

But should you meet with losses which im-
poverish }^ou, more or less, as in the case of
tempests, tires, inundations, dearths, robberies,
or lawsuits, then is the proper season to practise
poverty, receiving those losses with meekness,
and submitting with patience and constancy to
your impoverishment. Esau presented himself to
his father with his hands covered with hair, and
Jacob did the same ; but as the hair on Jacob's
hands belonged not to his skin, but his gloves, one
might take away the hair without injuring the
skin ; on the contrary, the hair on the hands of
Esau adhered to his skin, so that if any one would
attempt to pluck off his hair it would have caused
excessive pain. Thus, when our worldly goods
cleave to our heart, if a tempest, a thief, or an
impostor, should take any part of them from us,


(84 A DEVOUT LIFE.

*vhat complaints, trouble, and impatience do we
not fall into ? But when our goods do not cleave
to our hearts, and are only considered on account
of the carp God would have us take of them, should
they be taken from us, we lose neither our peace
nor our senses. Hence the difference betwixt
beasts and men, as to their garments ; for as the
garments of the former, viz., their skin, adhere to
their flesh, those of the latter are only put upon
them, so that they may be taken off at pleasure.


CHAPTER XVI.

HOW TO PRACTISE RICHNESS OF SPIRIT IN REAL POVERTY.

ftP^UT if you be really poor, dear Philothea, be
-Mm likewise, for God's sake, actually poor in
spirit : make a virtue of necessity, and value this
precious jewel of poverty at the high rate it de-
serves : its lustre is not discovered in this world,
and yet it is exceedingly rich and beautiful.

Be patient ; you are in good company ; our
Lord himself, his blessed mother, the apostles,
and innumerable saints, both men and women,
have been poor ; nay, even when they might have
been rich, they refused to be so. How many
great personages have there been, who, in spite
of contradictions from the world, have gone to
seek after holy poverty in cloisters and hospitals,
and took indefatigable pains to find her 1 Witness


PRACTICAL POVERTY. 185

St. Alexins, St. Paula, St. Paulinus, St. Angela,
and so many others ; and behold, Philothea, this
holy poverty, more gracious towards you, comes
to present herself to you in your own lodging ;
you have met her without being at the trouble of
seeking after her ; embrace her, then, as the dear
friend of Jesus Christ, who was born, who lived,
and who died in poverty ; poverty was his nurse
during the whole course of his life.

Your poverty, Philothea, enjoys two great
privileges, by means of which you may consid-
erably enhance its merits. The first is, that she
same not to you by choice, but b}r the will of God,
who has made you poor, without any concurrence
of your own will. Now, that which we receive
purely from the will of God is always very
agreeable to him, provided that we receive it with
a good heart, and through a love of his holy will ;
where there is 'east of our own there is most of
God ; the simple and pure acceptance of God's will
makes our offerings extremely pure.

The second privilege of this kind of poverty is
that it is truly poverty. That poverty which is
praised, caressed, esteemed, succored, and assisted
is nearly allied ^o riches ; at least, it is not
altogether poverty ; but that which is despised,
rejected, reproached, and abandoned, is poverty
indeed. Such is ordinary poverty ; for, as the
poor are not poor by their own choice, but from
necessity, their poverty is not much esteemed, for
which reason their poverty exceeds that of the
religious ; although otherwise the poverty of the
religious has a very great excellency, and is much


186 A DEVOUT LIFE.

more commendable, by reason of the vow, and of
the intention for which it is chosen.

Complain not, then, my dear Philothea, of you?
poverty ; for we never complain but of that which
displeases us ; and if poverty displease you, you
are no longer poor in spirit, but rich in affection.

Be not disconsolate for your not being so well
assisted as might appear necessary ; for in this
consists the excellence of poverty. To be willing
to be poor, and not to feel the hardships of poverty,
is to desire the honor of poverty with the conven-
ience of riches.

Be not ashamed to be poor, nor to ask alms in
charity. Receive with humility what shall be
given you, and bear the denial with meekness.
Frequently remember the journey our blessed
Lady undertook into Egypt, to preserve the life of
her dear Son, and how much contempt, poverty,
and misery she was obliged to suffer ; provided
you live thus, you will be very rich in your
poverty.

CHAPTER XVII.

OF FRIENDSHIP; FIRST OF THAT WHICH IS EVIL AND FRIVOLOUS.

/?-^OVE holds the first place among the several


fc* passions of the soul ; it is the sovereign of all
the motions of the heart ; it directs all the rest
towards it, and makes us such as is the object
of its love. Be careful, then, O Philothea ! to


DANGEROUS FRIENDSHIP. 187

entertain no evil love, for, if you do, you will
presently become evil. Friendship is the most
dangerous love of all ; because other loves may
be without communication ; but friendship, being
wholly grounded upon it, we can hardly hold a
communication of friendship with any person
without partaking of its qualities.

All love is not friendship ; for when one loves
without being again beloved, then there is love,
but not friendship ; because friendship is a com-
munication of love, therefore, where love is not
mutual, there can be no friendship. Nor is it
enough that it be mutual, but the parties that love
each other must know their mutual affection, for, if
they know it not, they have love, but not friendship.
There must be also some kind of communication
between them, which may be the ground of friend-
ship. Now, according to the diversity of the
communications, the friendship also diners, and
the communications are different according to the
variety of the things which they communicate to
each other; if they be false and vain, the friendship
is also false and vain; if they be true, the friend-
ship is likewise true ; and the more laudable the
goods may be the more laudable also is the
friendship. For as that honey is best which is
gathered from the blossom of the most exquisite
flowers, so that love which is founded upon the
most exquisite communication is the most noble.
And as there is honey in Heraclea of Pontus,
which is poisonous, and deprives those of reason
that eat it, because it is gathered from the aconite,
which abounds in that country ; even so the friend-


188 A DEVOUT LITE

ship, grounded upon the communication of false
and vicious goods, is altogether false and vicious.

The communication of carnal pleasures is a
mutual inclination and brutish allurement, which
can no more bear the name of friendship among
men than that of beasts for the like effects ; and if
there was no other communication in marriage
there would be no friendship at all , but because,
besides that, there is a communication in matri-
mony of life, of industry, of goods, of affections,
and of an indissoluble fidelity, therefore the friend-
ship of matrimony is a true and holy friendship. A
friendship that is grounded on the communication
of sensual pleasures is utterly gross, and unworthy
of the name of friendship ; and so is that which is
founded on virtues which are frivolous and vain ;
because these virtues also depend on the senses.
I call those pleasures sensual which are immedi-
ately and principally annexed to the exterior
senses ; such as the pleasure to behold a beautiful
person, to hear a sweet voice, to touch, and the
like. I call certain vain endowments and qualities
frivolous accomplishments, which weak minds call
virtues and perfections. Observe how the greater
pail of silly maids, women, and young people talk ;
they hesitate not to say : Such a gentleman has
many virtues and perfections, for he dances
gracefully, he plays well at all sorts of games,
he dresses fashionably, he sings delightfully,
speaks eloquently, and has a fine appearance ; it is
thus that mountebanks esteem those, in their way,
the most virtuous who are the greatest buffoons.

But as all these things regard the senses, so t.h*


OF FOXD LOVE. 189

friendships whieli proceed from them are termed
sensual, vain, and frivolous, and deserve rather the
name of foolish fondness than of friendship ; such
are the ordinary friendships of young people
which are grounded on curled locks, a fine head of
hair, smiling glances, mie clothes, affected coun-
tenances, and idle talk; a friendship suited to the
age of those lovers whose virtue is, as }'et, only
in the blossom, and their judgment in the bud ;
and, indeed, such amities being but transituiy, melt
a^ay like snow in the sun.


CHAPTER XVIII.

OF FOND LOVE.

fHEX these foolish friendships are maintained
clflk between persons of different sexes without
pretensions of marriage, they are called fond love:
for being but embryos, or rather phantoms of
friendship, they deserve not the name either of
true friendship or true love, by reason of their
excessive vanity and imperfection. Xow, by means
of these fondnesses, the hearts of men and of women
are caught and entangled with each other in vain
and foolish affections, based upon these frivolous
communications and wretched complacencies of
which I have been just speaking.

And although these dangerous loves, commonly
speaking, terminate at last in carnality and down-


190 A DEVOUT LIFE.

right lasciviousness, yet that is not the first design
or intention of the persons between whom they
pass ; otherwise they would not be merely fond
loves, but absolute impurities and uncleannesses.
Sometimes even many years pass before anything
directly contrary to the chastity of the body hap-
pens between them, whilst they content themselves
with giving their hearts the pleasure of wishes, de-
sires, sighs, amorous entertainments, and such
like fooleries and vanities ; and this upon different
pretensions.

Some have no other design than to satisfy their
hearts with loving and being loved, following in
this their amorous inclination ; and these regard
nothing in the choice of their loves but their
instinct : so that at the first meeting with an
agreeable object, without examining the interior,
or the comportment of the person, they begin this
fond communication, and entangle themselves in
these wretched nets, from which afterwards they
find great difficulty to disengage themselves.
Others suffer themselves to be carried to fond
loves, by the vanity of esteeming it no small glory
to catch and bind hearts by love. Now these
aiming at glory in the choice they make set their
net and lay their snares in specious, high, rare,
and illustrious places. Others are led away at
the same time, both by their amorous inclination
and by vanity ; for though their hearts be altogether
inclined to love, yet they will not engage themselves
in it without some advantage of glory. These
loves are always criminal, foolish, and vain;
criminal, because they end at length, and terminate


OF FOND LOVE. 191

in the sin of the flesh, and because they rob God,
the wife and the husband, of that love, and conse-
quently of that heart, which belonged to them ;
foolish, because they have neither foundation nor
reason : vain, because they yield neither profit,
honor, nor content ; on the contrary, they are
attended by a loss of time, are prejudicial to
honor, and bring no other pleasure than that of an
eagerness in pretending and hoping, without
knowing what they would have, or to what
they would make pretensions. For these wretched
and weak minds still imagine they have something
to expect from the testimonies which they recede
of reciprocal love; but yet they cannot tell what
this is; the desire of which can never end, but
goes on continually, pressing their hearts with
perpetual distrusts, jealousies, and disquietudes.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, in his discourse, ad-
dressed indeed to vain women, but applicable also
to men, says : " Thy natural beauty is sufficient for
thy husband ; but if it be for many men, like a
net spread out for a flock of birds, what will be
the conscciuence? He shall be pleasing to thee
who shall please himself with thy beauty ; thou
wilt return him glance for glance, look for look ;
presently will follow smiles and little amorous
words, dropped by stealth at the beginning, but
soon after they will become more familiar, and pass
to an open courtship. Take heed, my tongue ! of
telling what will follow : yet will I say this one
truth : nothing of all those things which young
men and women say and do together in these
foolish complacencies is exempted from grievous


192 A DEVOUT LIFE.

stings. All the links of wanton loves depend on
one another, and follow one another as one piece
of iron, touched by the loadstone, draws many
others after it."

How wisely has this great bishop spoken ! What
is it you think to do ? To give love ? No ; for no
one gives love voluntarily, that does not receive it
necessarily. He that catches m this chase is like-
wise caught himself. The herb wproxis receives
and conceives fire as soon as it sees it : our hearts
do the like : as soon as they see a soul inflamed
with love for them they are presently inflamed
with love for it. But some one will say, I am
willing to entertain some of this love, but not too
much. Alas ! you deceive yourselves, the fire of
love is more active and penetrating than you im-
agine : you think to receive but a spark, and will
wonder to see it in a moment take possession of
your whole heart, reduce all your resolutions to
ashes, and }'our reputation to smoke. "Who will
have pity on a charmer struck by a serpent?"
Ecclus. xii. 13. And I also, after the wise man,
cry out, O foolish and senseless people ! think you
to charm love in such a manner as to be able to
manage it at pleasure? You would play with it,
but it will sting and torment 3011 cruelly; and do
you know that every one will mock and deride you
for attempting to charm or tie down love, and on a
false assurance put into your bosom a dangerous
serpent, which has spoiled and destroyed both your
soul and your honor?

Good God ! what blindness is this, to play
aw*vy thus at hazard, against such frivolous stakes,


OF FOND LOVE. 193

the principal power of our soul ! Yes, Philothea,
for God regards not man, but for his soul ;
nor his soul, but for his will ; nor his will, but for
his love. Alas ! we have not near so much love
as we stand in need of; I mean to say that we fall
infinitely short of having sufficient wherewith to
love God ; and yet, wretches as we are, we lavish
it away foolishly on vain and frivolous things, as
if we had some to spare. Ah ! this great God,
who hath reserved to himself the whole love of our
souls, in acknowledgment of our creation, preser-
vation, and redemption, will exact a strict account
of all these criminal deductions we make from it ;
fcr, if he will make so rigorous an examination
into our idle words, how strictly will he not exam-
ine into our impertinent, foolish, and pernicious
loves !

The walnut-tree is very prejudicial to the vines
and fields wherein it is planted ; because, being so
large, it attracts all the moisture of the surrounding
earth, and renders it incapable of nourishing the
other plants ; the leaves are also so thick that
they make a large and close shade ; and lastly, it
allures the passengers to it, who, to beat down the
fruit, spoil and trample upon all about it. These
fond loves do the same injury to the soul, for they
possess her in such manner, and so strongly draw
her motions to themselves, that she has no strength
left to produce any good work : the leaves,
viz., their idle talk, their amusements, and their
dalliance, are so frequent, that all leisure time is
squandered away in them ; and, finally, they en-
gender so many temptations, distractions, sus-


194 A DEVlUT life.

picions, and other evil consequences, that the
whole heart is trampled down and destroyed by
them. In a word, these fond loves not only banish
heavenly love, but also the fear of God from the
soul ; they waste the spirit and ruin reputation ;
they are the sport of courts, but the plague of
hearts .


CHAPTER XIX.

OF TRUE FRIENDSHIP.

W2ZOVE every one, Philothea, with a strenuous
Aa love of charity, but have no friendship, except
for those that communicate with you the things of
virtue : and the more exquisite the virtues are,
which shall be the matter of your communications,
the more perfect shall your friendship also be. If
this communication be in the sciences, the friendship
is certainly very commendable ; but still more so
if it be in the moral virtues; in prudence, discre-
tion, fortitude, and justice. But should your
reciprocal communications relate to charity,
devotion, and Christian perfection, good God ! how
precious will this friendship be ! It will be
excellent, because it comes from God ; excellent,
because it tends to God ; excellent, because its very
band is God ; excellent, because it shall last
eternally in God. Oh, how good it is to love on
earth as they love in heaven ; to learn to cherish


TRUE FRIENDSHIP. 195

each otner in this world, as we shall cio eternally
in the next !

I speak not here of that simple love of charity
which we must have for all men ; but of that
spiritual friendship, by which two, three, or more
souls communicate one to another their devotion
and spiritual affections, and make themselves all
but one spirit. Such happy souls may justly sing :
''Behold how good and pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity!" Ps. cxxxii. 1. For
the delicious balm of devotion distils out of one
heart into another, by so continual a participation,
that it may be said that God has poured out upon
this friendship "his blessing and life everlasting."
I consider all other friendships as but so many
shadows in respect to this, and that their bonds
are but chains of glass or of jet, in comparison of this
bond of holy devotion, which is more precious than

Make no other kind of friendship than this : I
speak of such friends as you choose yourself; but
you must not, therefore, forsake or neglect the
friendships which nature or former duties oblige
you to cultivate with your parents, kindred, bene-
factors, neighbors, and others.

Many perhaps may say : " "We should have no
kind of particular affection and friendship, because
it occupies the heart, distracts the mind, and begets
envy ; " but they are mistaken, because having seen,
in the writings of many devout authors, that par-
ticular friendships and extraordinary affection are
of infinite prejudice to religious persons, they there-
fore imagine that it is the same with regard to the


196 A DEVOUT LIFE.

rest of the world ; but there is a material difference ;
for, as in a well-ordered monastery, where the
common design of all tends to true devotion, it is
not requisite to make these particular communi-
cations of friendship, lest by seeking among indi-
viduals for that which is common to the whole,
they should fall from particularities to partialities.
But for those who dwell among worldlings, and
desire to embrace true virtue, it is necessary for
them to unite themselves together by a holy and
sacred friendship, since by this means they en-
courage, assist, and conduct each other to good :
for, as they that walk on plain ground need not
lend each other a hand, whilst they that are in a
rugged and slippery road hold one by the other,
to Avalk more securely ; so they that are in religious
orders stand in no want of particular friendships ;
but they that are in the world have need of them,
to secure and assist each other amidst the many
dangerous passages through which they are to
pass. In the world all are not directed by the
same views, nor actuated by the same spirit ;
we must therefore separate ourselves, and contract
friendships according to our several pretensions.
This particularity causes indeed a partiality ; but it
is a holy partiality, which creates no other division
but that which of necessity should always subsist
betwixt good and evil, sheep and goats, bees and
hornets.

No one surely can deny but that our Lord loved
St. John, Lazarus, Martha, and Magdalen, Avith a
more sweet and more special friendship. We
know that St. Peter tenderly cherished St. Mark


TRUE FRIENDSHIP. 197

and St. Petronilla, as St. Paul did Timothy and
St. Thecla. St. Gregory Nazianzen boasts an
hundred times of the incomparable friendship he
had with the Great St. Basil, and describes it in
this manner : " It seemed that in us there was but
one soul dwelling in two bodies, and if those are
not to be believed, who say that all things are in
all things, yet of us two you may believe, that we
were both in each other ; we had each of us one
only pretension to cultivate virtue, and to accom-
modate all the designs of our life to future hopes ;
going in this manner out of mortal earth before we
died in it." St. Austin testifies that St. Ambrose
loved St. Monica entirely for the real virtue he
saw in her, and that she reciprocally loved him as
an angel of God. But I am blamable in detaining
you so long on so clear a matter. St. Jerome,
St. Austin, St. Gregory, St. Bernard, and all the
greatest servants of God, have had very particular
friendships, without any prejudice to their per-
fection. St. Paul, reproaching the disorders of
the gentiles, accuses them that they were people
without affection ; that is to say, that they had no
true friendship. And St. Thomas, with all the
wisest philosophers, acknowledges that friendship
is a virtue; and he speaks of "particular friend-
ship," since, as he says, " perfect friendship cannot
be extended to a great many persons." Perfection
therefore consists, not in having no friendship, but
in having none but with such as are good and
holvc


198 A DEVOUT LITE.

CHAPTER XX.

OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TRUE AND VAIN FRIENDSHIP^

Sfl^BSERVE, Philothea, this important admoni-
^J* tion. As the poisonous honey of Heraclea is
so similar to the other that is wholesome, that
there is great danger of mistaking the one tor the
other, or of taking them mixed together (for the
goodness of the one cannot destroy the poison of
the other) ; so he must stand upon his guard who
would not be deceived in friendships, particularly
when contracted betwixt persons of different sexes,
under what pretext soever. The devil often effects
a change in those that love ; they begin with virt-
uous love, with which, if not attended to with the
utmost discretion, fond love will begin to minsrle
itself, then sensual love, and afterwards carnal
love ; yea, there is even danger in spiritual love, if
we are not extremely upon our guard ; though in
this it if] more difficult to be imposed upon, because
its purity and wmiteness make the spots and stains
which Satan seeks to mingle with it more apparent,
and therefore when he takes this in hand he does
it more subtilely, and endeavors to introduce im-
purities by almost insensible degrees.

You may distinguish wrorldly from holy friend-
ship in the same manner as the poisonous honey of
Heraclea is known from the other ; for as the honey
of Heraclea is sweeter than the ordinary honey, on
account of the juice of the aconite, which gives it


VAIX FRIENDSHIP. 199

an additional flavor ; so worldly friendship ordi-
narily produces a great profusion of endearing
words, passionate expressions, with admiration of
beauty, behavior, and other sensual qualities.
Holy friendship, on the contrary, speaks a plain
and sincere language, and commends nothing but
virtue and the grace of God, the only foundation
on which it subsists. As the honey of Haraclea,
when swallowed, occasions a giddiness in the head,
so false friendship produces a vertigo in the mind,
which makes persons stagger in chastity and
devotion, hurrying them on to affected, wanton,
and immodest looks, sensual caresses, inordinate
sighs, and ridiculous complaints of not being
beloved, to a studied and enticing carriage, tc
gallantries, to interchanging of kisses, with other
familiarities and indecent favors, the certain and
unquestionable presages of the approaching ruin of
chastity. But the looks of holy friendship are
simple and modest ; its caresses pure and sincere }
its sighs are but for heaven ; its familiarities are
only spiritual ; its complaints but when God is not
beloved. These are infallible marks of a holy
friendship. As the honey of Heraclea affects the
sight, so this worldly friendship dazzles the
judgment to such a degree, that they who are
infected with it think they do well when they act
Wrongly, and believe their excuses and pretexts
for two reasons : they fear the light, and love
darkness. But holy friendship is clear-sighted,
and never conceals herself, but appears willingly
before those that are good. In fine, as the honey
of Heraclea leaves a great bitterness in the mouth,


200 A DEVOUT LIFE.

so false friendships change into lewd and carnal
words and demands ; and, in case of refusal, into
injuries, slanders, imposture, sadness, confusion,
and jealousies, which often terminate in madness.
Chaste friendship is always equally honest, civil,
and amiable, and changes only into a purer union
of spirits ; a lively image of the blessed friendship
existing in heaven.

St. Gregory Nazianzen says, that as the cry of
the peacock, when he struts and spreads his
feathers, excites the peahens to lust, so, when we
see a man dressed in his best apparel, approaching
to flatter, and whisper in the ears of a woman,
without pretension to lawful marriage, then no
doubt it is to incite her to impurity ; and every
virtuous woman will stop her ears against the cry
of this peacock, the voice of this enchanter, who
seeks thus subtilely to charm her ; but, should she
hearken to him, good God ! what an ill presage of
the future loss of her heart !

Young people who use gestures, glances, and
caresses, or speak words in which they would not
willingly be surprised by their fathers, mothers,
husbands, wives, or confessors, testify hereby that
they are treating of something contrary to honor
and conscience. Our blessed Lady was troubled
when she saw an angel in the shape of a man,
because she was alone, and because he gave her
extraordinary though heavenly praises. O Saviour
of the world ! if purity itself be afraid of an angel
in the shape of a man, why should not impurity
fear a man, even though he should come in the


REMEDIES AGAINST EVIL FRIENDSHIP. 201

shape of an angel, especially when he praises hej
with sensual and earthly commendations ?


CHAPTER XXI.

ADVICES AND REMEDIES AGAINST EVIL FRIENDS*


I


§TJT what remedies must we take against this
* multitude of filthy loves, fondnesses, and im-
purities? As soon as you perceive the first
approach of them, turn suddenly away, with an
absolute horror and detestation, run to the cross
of your Saviour, take the crown of thorns, and
press it to your heart, so that the evil spirit may
not come near it. Beware of coming to any kind
of compromise with this enemy : do not say I will
hearken to him, but will do nothing of what he
shall say to me : I will lend him my ears, but
will refuse him my heart. Oh, no ! Philothea ; for
God's sake, be resolute on these occasions : the
heart and the ears correspond with each other ;
and, as it is impossible to stop a torrent that
descends by the brow of a mountain, so is it hard
to prevent the love which has entered in at the
ear from falling suddenly down into the heart.

Alcmaeon pretended that goats breathe by the
ears, but Aristotle denies it ; as for myself I
cannot decide the question ; but I know that our
heart breathes by the ear ; and as it sends forth its
own thoughts by the tongue, so it receives tb


202 A DEVOUT LIFE.

thoughts of others by .the ear. Let us, then, keep
a diligent guard over our ears, that we may not
inhale the corrupt air of filthy words, for otherwise
our hearts will soon be infected. Hearken to no
kind of propositions, under wThat pretext soever ;
in this case alone there is no danger of being rude
and uncivil.

Remember that you have dedicated jour heart
to God, and that your love having been sacrificed
to him, it would be a sacrilege to alienate the
least part of it from him. Rather sacrifice it to
him anew by a thousand resolutions and protes-
tations ; and, keeping yourself close within them,
as a deer within its covert, call upon God, and he
will help you, and take you under his protection,
that you may live for him alone.

But if you are already entangled in the nets of
filthy loves, good God ! how difficult will it be to
extricate yourself from them ! Place yourself
before the divine Majesty, acknowledge, in his
presence, the excess of your misery, frailty, and
vanity. Then, with the greatest efibrt of which
your heart is capable, detest them; abjure the
vain profession you have lpade of them ; renounce
all the promises received, and, with the most gen-
erous and absolute resolution, determine in your
heart never to permit them to occupy the least
thought for the remainder of your life.

An excellent remedy would be to withdraw
yourself from the object ; for as they that have
been bitten by serpents cannot easily be cured in
the presence of those who were before Avounded
by the same animal, so the person stung with love


REMEDIES AGAINST o^VIL FRIENDSHIP. 203

will hardly be cured of this passion as long as he
is near the other who has been similarly wounded.
Change of place contributes very much to allay
the heat and pains of grief or love. The youth of
whom St. Ambrose speaks, in his second book of
Penance, having made a long journey, returned
home altogether delivered from those fond loves
he haa formerly entertained, and so much changed
that his foolish mistress meeting him, and saying,
" Dost thou no. know me ? am I not the same that
I was ?" — "Yes," answered he, "but I am no longer
the same." Absence has wrought in him this happy
change. St. Austin also testifies that, to mitigate
the grief he suffered for the death of his friend, he
withdrew himself from Tagasta, the place in which
his friend died, and went to Carthage.

But what must he do who cannot withdraw
himself? Let him absolutely retrench all particular
familiarity, all private conversation, amorous looks,
smiles, and, in general, all sorts of communication
and allurement, which may nourish this dangerous
passion ; if he must speak to the other party, let
it be only to declare, with a bold, short, and serious
protestation, the eternal divorce which he has
sworn. I call upon every one who has fallen into
these wretched snares : cut them, — break them, — ■
tear them ; do not amuse yourself in unravelling
these criminal friendships ; you must tear and rend
them asunder ; do not untie the knots, but break
or cut them, so that the cords and strings may be
rendered useless : do not enter into any compromise
with a love which is so contrary to the love of
God.


204 A DEVOUT LIFE.

But after I have broken the chains of his infamous
bondage there will still remain some vestiges :
the marks and prints of the irons will still be
imprinted in my feet ; that is, my affections. No,
Philothea, they will not, provided you have con-
ceived as great a detestation of the evil as it
deserves ; you will now be excited with no other
motion but that of an extreme horror for this base
love and all its appendages, and will entertain no
other affection towards the forsak ,n object but
that of a pure charity, for God's sake. But if
through the imperfection of your repentance, there
should, yet remain in you any evil inclinations,
procure a mental solitude for your soul, according
to what I have taught you before, and retire
thither as often as you can, and by a thousand
reiterated ejaculations renounce all your criminal
inclinations, and reject them with your whole force.
Read pious and holy books with more than
ordinary application ; go to confession and com-
munion more frequently ; treat humbly and
sincerely with your director, or some prudent and
faithful friend, concerning all the suggestions and
temptations of this kind which may befall you,
and doubt not but God will deliver you from those
criminal passions, provided you continue faithfully
in these good exercises.

Ah, will it not be ingratitude to break off a
friendship so unmercifully? Oh, how happy is
that ingratitude which makes us pleasing to God !
But no, Philothea, I tell you, in the name of God,
rhis will be no ingratitude, but a great benefit^
which you shall confer upon your lover ; because,


ADVICES OX FRIENDSHIP. 205

in breaking your own bonds asunder, you shall
also break his, since they were common to you
both ; and though for the present he may not be
sensible of his happiness, yet he will soon ac-
knowledge it, and exclaim with you in thanks'
giving : r' O Lord, thou hast broken my bonds, I
will sacrifice to thee a sacrifice of praise, and cal1
upon thy holy name." Ps. cxv.


CHAPTER XXII.

OTHER ADVICES ON FRIENDSHIPS.

T HAVE another important advice to give you
^ on this subject. Friendship requires great
communication between friends, otherwise it can
neither grow nor subsist. Wherefore it often
happens, that with this communication of friend-
ship many other communications insensibly glide
from one heart to another, by a mutual infusion
and reciprocal intercourse of affections, inclina-
tions, and impressions. This happens especially
when we have a high esteem for him whom we
love ; for then we open our heart in such manner
to his friendship that with it his inclinations and
impressions, whether good or bad, enter rapidly.
Certainly the bees, that gather the honey of
Heraclea. seek nothing but honey ; yet with the
honey they insensibly suck the poisonous qualities
of the aconite, from which they gather it. Good


206 A DEVOUT LIFE.

God ! Philothea ; on these occasions we must care-
fully practise what the Saviour of our souls was
accustomed to say: "Be ye good bankers," or
changers of money ; that is to sa}r, " Eeceive not
bad money with the good, nor base gold with the
fine " ; separate that which is precious from that
which is vile ; for there is scarcely any person
that has not some imperfection. For why should
we receive promiscuously the imperfections of a
friend, together with his friendship? We must
love him indeed, notwithstanding his imperfec-
tions ; but we must neither love nor receive his
imperfections ; for friendship requires a communi-
cation of good, not of evil. Wherefore as they
that draw gravel out of the river Tagus separate
the gold which they find, to carry it away, and
leave the sand on the banks ; so they, who have
the communication of some good friendship ought
to separate it from the imperfections, and not
sutler them to enter their souls. St. Gregory
Xazianzen testifies, that many, loving and admiring
St. Bazil, were brought insensibly to imitate him,
even in his outward imperfections, as in speaking
slowly, and with his spirit abstracted and pen-
sive, in the fashion of his beard, and in his gait.
And we often see husbands, wives, children, and
friends, who, having a great esteem for their
friends, parents, husbands, and wives, acquire,
either by condescension or imitation, a thousand
little ill-humors in their communication of friend-
ship. Now this should not be so by any means,
for every one has evil inclinations enough of his
own. without charging himself with those of


ADVICES OX FRIENDSHIP. 207

others ; and friendship is so far from requiring it,
that, on the contrary, it obliges us mutually to aid
and assist one another, in order to free ourselves
from all kind of imperfections. We must, indeed,
meekly bear with our friend in his imperfections ;
but we must not lead him into imperfections, much
less imbibe his imperfections ourselves. But I
speak only of imperfections ; for, as to sins, we
must neither occasion them, nor tolerate them in
our friends. It is either a weak or a wicked
friendship to behold our friend perish, and not to
help him; — to see him die of an imposthume,
and not dare to save his life by opening it with
the lancet of correction. True and living friend-
ship cannot subsist in the midst of sins. As the
salamander extinguishes the lire in which he lies,
so sin destroys the friendship in which it lodges.
If it be but a transient sin, friendship will presently
put it to flight by correction ; but if it be habitual,
and take up its habitation, friendship immediately
perishes ; for it subsists only upon the solid
foundation of virtue. We must never, then,
commit sin for the sake of friendship. A friend
becomes an enemy when he would lead us to sin ;
and he deserves to lose his friend when he would
destroy his soul. It is an infallible mark of false
friendship to see it exercised towards a vicious
person, be his sins of what kind soever ; for, if he
whom we love be vicious, without doubt our
friendship is also vicious, since, seeing it cannot
regard true virtue, it must needs be grounded on
some frivolous virtue, or sensual quality. Society
formed for traffic among merchants is but a shad-


208 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ow of true friendship ; since it is not made for
the love of the person, but for the love of gain.

Finally, the following divine sentences are two
main pillars, upon which reposes a Christian life-,
the one is that of the wise man : " He that fcareth
God shall likewise have a good friendship " ; the
other is that of the Apostle St. James : " The
friendship of this world is the enemy of God. "


CHAPTER XXIII.

OF THE EXERCISES OF EXTERIOR MORTIFICATION.

•YJYHEY who treat of agriculture tell us that if any
£&> word be written upon a very sound almond,
and it be again enclosed in the shell and planted,
all the fruit which that troe shall produce will have
the same word engraven upon it. As for myself,
Philothea, I could never approve of the method of
those who, to reform a man, begin with his
exterior, such as his gestures, his dress, or his
hair; on the contrary, I think we ought to begin
with his interior. "Be converted to me," said
God, Joel ii., "with your whole heart." "Son,
give me thy heart." Prov. xxiii. For, the heart
being the genuine source of our actions, our works
will always correspond to our heart. The divine
Spouse, inviting the soul, Cant, v., "Put me," says
he, " as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy
arm. Yes, verily; for whoever has Jesus Christ


EXTERIOR MORTIFICATION. 209

in his heart Avill quickly show him in all his ex-
terior actions. I desire, therefore, dear Philothea,
above all things else, to engrave upon your heart
this sacred motto, "Live, Jesus"; being assured
that your life, which proceeds from the heart as an
almond tree from its kernel, will afterwards
produce the same words of salvation written upon
all your actions ; for, as this sweet Jesus lives
within your heart, so will he also live in all your
exterior, in your eyes, your mouth, your hands,
and even the hair on your head, so that you will
be able to say, with St. Paul, "I live, now not I,
but Christ liveth in me." In a word, he that has
gained the heart has gained the whole man ; but
even this heart, by which we would begin, requires
to be instructed how it should frame its exterior
behavior, so that men may not only behold holy
devotion therein, but also wisdom and discretion ;
for this end I desire your serious attention to the
following short admonitions : —

If you are able to endure fasting, }~ou would do
well to fast some days besides those which are
commanded by the Church ; for besides the usual
effects of fasting, viz., to elevate the spirit, to keep
the flesh in subjection, to exercise virtue, and
acquire a greater reward in heaven, it is a great
means to restrain gluttony, and keep the sensual
appetite and body subject to the law of the spirit ;
and although we may not fast much, yet the enemy
fears us when he discovers that we know how to
fast. Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays are
the days in which the ancient Christians chiefly
exercised themselves in abstinence ; choose, theru


210 A DEVOUT LIFE.

some of these days to fast, as far as your devotion
and the discretion of your director shall advise
you.

I would willingly say to you, as St. Jerome
said to the pious Laeta : "Long and immoderate
fastings displease me greatly, especially in those
that are yet in their tender age." I have learned,
by experience, that young people, who become
infirm through excess of fasting, easily give way
to delicacies. We are greatly exposed to temp-
tations, both when our body is too much pampered,
and when it is too much weakened ; for the one
makes it insolent with ease, and the other desperate
with affliction. The want of this moderation in
the use of fasting, disciplines, hair-shirts, and
other austerities, renders the best years of many
unprofitable in the service of charity, as it did
even in St. Bernard, who repented that he had
used so much austerity ; and the more cruelly they
ill-treated their bodies in the beginning, the more
were the}r constrained to favor them in the end.
"Would they not have done better to have mortified
their bodies moderately, and in proportion to the
offices and labors which their condition obliged
them ?

Labor, as well as fasting, serves to mortify and
subdue the flesh. Now, provided the labor you
undertake contributes to the glory of God and
your own welfare, I would prefer that you should
suffer the pain of labor rather than tint of fasting.
This is the intention of the Church, which exempts
those labors that contribute to the service of God
and our neighbor even from the fasts commanded.


EXTERIOR MORTIFICATION. 211

Some find it painful to fast, others to serve the
sick, or visit prisoners ; others to hear confession,
to preach, to pray, and to perform similar exer-
cises ; these last pains are of more value than the
former ; for, besides subduing the body, they
produce fruits much more desirable, and therefore,
generally speaking, it is better to preserve our
bodily bfcrength more than may be necessary, in
order to perform these functions, than to weaken
it too much ; for we may always abate it when we
wish, but we cannot always repair it when we
would.

We should attend with great reverence to the
admonition given by our blessed Saviour to his
disciples, Luke x. 9: "Eat the things that are
set before you." It is, in my opinion, a greater
virtue to eat, without choice, that which is laid
before you, and in the same order as it is pre-
sented, whether it be more or less agreeable to
your taste, than always to choose the worst ; for
although this latter way of living seems more
austere, yet the former has, notwithstanding, more
resignation, since by it we renounce not only our
own taste, but even our own choice ; and it is no
small mortification to accommodate our taste to
every kind of meat, and keep it in subjection to al J
occurrences. Besides, this kind of mortification
makes no parade, gives no trouble to any one,
ind is happily adapted to civil life. To set one
kind of meat aside to eat another — to eat of every
dish — to think nothing well dressed, or sufficiently
exquisite — bespeak a heart too much attached to
delicacies and dainties. I esteem St. Bernard in


212 A DEVOUT LIFE.

drinking oil instead of water or wine, more than if
he had drunk designedly the most bitter draught :
for it was a sure sign that he did not consider
what he drank ; and in this indifference respecting
our food consists the perfection of the practice of
that sacred rule, rr Eat that which is set before you.''
I except, however, such meats as may prejudice
the health, or incommode the spirit, such as hot
and high-seasoned meats ; as also certain occasions,
in which nature requires recreation and assistance
in order to be able to support some labor for the
glory of God. A continual and moderate sobriety
is preferable to violent abstinences, practised occa-
sionally, and mingled with great relaxations.

A moderate use of discipline awakens the ap-
petite of devotion. The hair shirt mortifies the
flesh exceedingly ; but the use of it, generally
speaking, is not proper either for married persons
or tender complexions, or for such as have other
great pains to support. However, upon some
remarkable days of penance, it may be used by
the advice of a discreet confessor.

We must dedicate the night to sleep, every one
as much as his constitution requires, so that he
may be able to watch and spend the day profit-
ably ; and also because the Holy Scriptures, the
examples of the saints, and reason itself, strenu-
ously recommend the morning to us as the most
fruitful part of time, and our Lord himself is
named the Orient, or rising sun, and our blessed
Lady the dawning of the day. I think it a point
of virtue to retire to rest early in the evening,
that we may be enabled to awake and rise early


EXTERIOR MORTIFICATION. 213

in the morning, which is certainly, of all other
times, the most favorable, the most agreeable, and
the least exposed to disturbance and distractions ;
when the very birds invite us to awake and praise
God ; so that early-rising is equally serviceable to
health and holiness.

Balaam, mounted on his ass, was going to king
Balak ; but because he had not a right intention,
the angel waited for him in the way, with a sword
in his hand to kill them. The ass, on seeing the
angel, stood still three several times, and became
restive. Balaam in the mean time beat her cruelly
with his staff to make her advance forward, until
the beast at the third time, falling under Balaam,
by an extraordinary miracle spoke to him, saying,
Numb. xii. 28: " What have I done to thee?
why strikest thou me, lo now this third time?'*
Balaam's eyes were soon opened, and he saw the
angel, who said to him, " \Vhy beatest thou thy
ass ? if she had not turned out of the way giving
place to me, I had slain thee, and she should have
lived." Then Balaam said to the angel, "I have
sinned, not knowing that thou didst stand against
me." Behold, Philothea, although Balaam be the
cause of the evil, yet he strikes and beats his poor
beast, that could not prevent it. It is often the
same case with us ; for example, a woman sees
her husband or child sick, and presently betakes
herself to fasting, hair-cloth, and the discipline,
as David did on a similar occasion. Alas ! my
dear friend, you beat the poor beast, you afflict
your body ; but it cannot remedy the evil, nor is it
on that account that God's sword is drawn against


214 A DEVOUT LIFE.

you ; correct your heart, which is an idolator oi
this husband, and which, having tolerated a thou-
sand vices in this child, has destined it to pride,
vanity, and ambition. Again, a man perceives
himself frequently to relapse in a shameful manner
into the sin of impurity ; an inward remorse as-
sails his conscience, and his heart returning to
itself, he says, "Ah, wicked flesh ! ah, treacherous
body ! thou hast betrayed me ; " and immediately
he inflicts great blows on his flesh, with immoderate
fasting, excessive discipline, and insupportable
hair-shirts. O poor soul ! if thy flesh could speak,
as Balaam's beast did, she would say to thee,
"Why, O wretch! dost thou strike me?" It is
against thee, O my soul ! that God arms his ven-
geance ; it is thou that art the criminal ; why dost
thou lead me into bad company? why dost thou
employ my eyes, my hands, and my lips in wan-
tonness ? why dost thou trouble me with impure
imaginations? Cherish or>od thoughts, and I shall
have no evil motions ; keep company with those that
are modest and chaste, and I shall not be provoked
to lust. It is thou, alas, that thro west me into the
fire, and yet thou wouidst not have me burn ; thou
castest smoke into my eyes, and yet wouidst not
have them inflamed. And God, without doubt,
says to you in these cases, Beat, break, rend, and
crush your heart to pieces, for it is against it
principally that my anger is excited. Although,
to remedy our vices, it may be good to mortify
the flesh, yet it is still more necessary to purify
our affections and refresh our hearts. But let us


CONVERSATION AND SOLITUDE. 215

never undertake corporal austerities without tne
advice of our spiritual director.


CHAPTER XXIV.

OF CONVERSATION AND SOLITUDE.

TJT'O seek and avoid conversation are two ex-
^^ tremes equally blamable in the devotion of
those that live in the world, which is that of which
we are now treating. To shun all conversations
savors of disdain, and contempt of our neighbor;
and to be addicted to them is a mark of sloth and
idleness. We must love our neighbor as our-
selves, and to prove that we love him we must
not fly his company ; and to testify that we love
ourselves we must remain with ourselves when
we are alone by ourselves. " Think first of thy-
self," says St. Bernard, "and then of others." If,
then, nothing obliges you to go abroad into com-
pany, or to receive company at home, remain with
yourself, and entertain yourself with your own
heart ; but if company visits you, or any just
cause invites you into company, go in God's
name, Philothea, and see your neighbor with a
benevolent heart and a good intention.

We call those conversations evil which are held
with an evil intention, or when the company is vi-
cious, indiscreet, and dissolute ; and must avoid
them as bees shun wasps or hornets. For, as when


21(> A DEVOUT LIFE.

persons are bitten by mad dogs, their perspiration,
their breath, aud their very spittle, become infec-
cious, especially for children, and those of a tender
complexion; so vicious and dissolute persons
cannot be visited without the utmost hazard and
danger, especially by those whose devotion is as
yet young and tender.

There are some unprofitable conversations held
merely to recreate and divert us from our serious
occupations, to which we must not be too much
addicted, although we may allow them to occupy
the leisure destined for recreation. Other con-
versations have civility for their object, as in
the case 01 mutual visits, and certain assemblies
made 10 do honor to our neighbor. With respect
to these, as Ave ought not to be superstitious in
the practice of them, so neither must wTe be uncivil
in contemning them, but modestly comply with
our duty in their regard, so that we may equally
avoid both ill-breeding and levity.

It remains for us to speak of the profitable con-
versation of devout and virtuous persons. To
converse frequently, Philothea, with such persons
will be to you of the utmost benefit. As the vine
that is planted amongst olive trees produces oily
grapes, which have the taste of olives, so the soul
which is often in the company of virtuous people
cannot but partake of their qualities. As drones
cannot make honey without the assistance of the
bees, so it is of oreat advantage to us in the
exercise of devotion to converse with those that
are devout.

In all conversations, sincerity, simplicity, meet-


CONVERSATION AND SOLITUDE. 217

ness, and modesty should be preserved. There
are some persons who make no gesture or motion
without so much affectation as to trouble the
company ; and as he who cannot walk without
oounting his steps, or speak without singing, would
be troublesome to the rest of mankind, so they
who affect an artificial carriage, and do nothing
without affectation, are very disagreeable in con-
versation, for in such persons there is always
some kind of presumption. Let a moderate cheer-
fulness be ordinarily predominant in our conver
sation. St. Romuald and St. Anthony are highly
commended, that, notwithstanding all their aus-
terities, they had always both their countenance
and their discourse adorned with joy, gayety, and
courtesy. "Rejoice with them that rejoice." Rom.
xii. 13. And again I say to you, with the Apostle,
" Rejoice always, but in the Lord. Let your
modesty be known to all men." Phil. iv. 4. To
rejoice in cur Lord, the subject of your joy must
not only be lawful, but also decent ; and this I
say, because there are some things lawful, which
yet are not decent ; and, that your modesty may be
known to all, keep yourself free from insolence,
which is always reprehensible. To cause one of
the company to fall down, to disfigure another's
face, are foolish and insolent merriments.

But, besides that mental solitude to which you
may retreat, even amidst the greatest conversation,
as I have hitherto observed, P. ii. ch. 12, you
ought also to love local and real solitude : not that
you should go into the desert, as St. Mary of
Egypt, St. Paul, St. Anthony, St. Arsenius, and


218 A DEVOUT LIFE.

the other ancient solitaries, did; but that you
should remain for some time alone by yourself in
your chamber or garden, or in some other place,
where you may at leisure withdraw your spirit
into your heart, and recreate your soul with pious
meditations, holy thoughts, or spiritual reading.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of himself, says,
"I walked with myself about sunset, and passed
the time upon the sea-shore ; for I am accustomed
to use this recreation to refresh myself, and to
shake off a little my ordinary troubles ; and after-
wards he relates the pious reflections he made,
which I have already mentioned. St. Austin
relates, that often going into the chamber of St.
Ambrose, who never denied entrance to any one,
he found him reading, and that after having
remained awhile, for fear of interrupting him, he
departed again without speaking a word, thinking
that the little time that remained to this great
pastor for recreating his spirit, after the hurry of
his various affairs, should not be taken from him.
And when the apostles one day had told our Lord
how they had preached, and how much they had
done, he said to them, Mark vi. 13: r' Come ye
apart into a desert place, and rest a little."


DECENCY IN ATTIRE. 219

CHAPTER XXV.

OF DECENCY IN ATTIRE.

>QT. PAUL desires that devout women, and the
^^ same may be said of men, should be attired
in decent apparel, adorning themselves with mod-
esty and sobriety. 1 Tim. ii. 9. The decency and
other ornaments of apparel depend on the matter,
the form, and the cleanliness of them. As to the
cleanliness, it should be almost always entire in our
apparel, on which we should not permit any kind
of tilth to remain. Exterior neatness represents in
some degree the cleanliness of the interior ; and
God himself requires corporal cleanliness in those
that approach the altar, and have the principal
charge of devotion.

As to the matter, form, and decency of our
dress, it should be considered according to the
several circumstances of the time, the age, the
quality, the company, and the occasions. People
are ordinarily better dressed on holidays, and this
in proportion to the solemnity of the feast which
is celebrated. In times of penance, as in Lent,
their ornaments are laid aside. At marriages
they put on wedding-garments ; at funerals they
use mourning ; when near the prince they dress
themselves in their best attire ; which they put oft'
when they are only amongst their own domestics.

The married woman ma}' and ought to adorn her-
self when she is with her husband, and he desires


220 A DEVOUT LIFE.

it ; but if she should do so when she is at a
distance from him, it will be asked, whose eyes
she desires to favor? A greater liberty in point
of ornaments is allowed to maidens, because they
may lawfully desire to appear agreeable to many,
although with no other intention than to gain one
by holy marriage. Neither is it blamable in wid-
ows, who propose to marry, to adorn themselves,
provided they betray no levity ; for, having already
been mistresses of families, and passed through the
griefs of widowhood, they should be considered as
being of a more mature and settled mind. But as
for those that are widows indeed, not only in body,
but in heart also, no other ornament becomes them
but humility, modesty, and devotion ; for, if they
have an inclination to gain the love of men, they
are not widows indeed ; and, if they have no such
desire, why do they carry about them the instru-
ments of love ? Old people are always ridiculous
when they wish to be gay ; this folly is only sup-
portable in youth.

Be neat, Phiiothea ; let nothing be negligent about
you. It is a kind of contempt of those with whom
we converse, to frequent their company in uncomely
apparel ; but, at the same time, avoid all affectation,
vanity, curiosity, or levity in your dress. Keep
yourself always, as much as possible, on the side
of plainness and modesty, which, without doubt,
is the greatest ornament of beauty, and the best
excuse for the want of it.

St. Peter, 1 Epist. iii. 3, admonishes Avomen in
oarticular not to wear their hair much curled ir
Snerlets and wreaths ; but men who are so weak as


OF DISCOURSE. 22\

to amuse themselves about such toys are justly
ridiculed for their effeminacy ; and even women,
who are thus vain, are esteemed to be very weak
in their chastity; at least, if they are chaste, it is
not to be discovered amidst so many toys and fop-
peries. They say they mean no evil by these
things ; but I again repeat that the devil thinks
very differently. I would have devout people,
whether men or women, the best dressed of the
company, but the least pompous and affected ; I
would have them adorned with gracefulness, de-
cency, and dignity. St Lewis says, in one word,
that each one should dress according to his condi-
tion ; so that the wise and the good may have no rea-
son to complain that you do too much, nor young
people to say that you do too little. But, in case
young people will not content themselves with
what is decent, we must conform to the judgment
of the wise.


3>*<C


CHAPTER XXVI.

OF DISCOURSE AND, FIRST, HOW WE MUST SPEAK OF GOD,

|7V<$ physicians discover the health or sickness of
^^ a man by looking on his tongue, so our words
are true indications of the qualities of our souls.
"By thy words," says our Saviour, Matt. xii. 37,
''thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou
shalt be condemned.*' A.Ve readily move our hand


222 A DEVOUT LIFE.

to the pain that we feel, and the tongue to the
love we entertain.

If, then, Philothea, you are in love with God, you
will often speak of him, in your familiar discourses
with those of your household, your friends, and
your neighbors: "For the mouth of the just will
meditate on wisdom, and his tongue will speak
judgment." Ps. xxxvi. 30. As bees, with their
little mouths, touch nothing but honey ; so should
your tongue be always sweetened with its God,
and find no greater pleasure than in the sweet
praises and blessings of his name flowing between
your lips, like St. Francis, who used to apply his
tongue to his lips, after pronouncing the holy name
of the Lord, to draw thence the greatest sweetness
in the world.

But speak always of God as of God ; that is,
reverently and devoutly ; not with ostentation or
affectation, but with a spirit of meekness, charity,
and humility, distilling as much as you can, as it
is said of the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. iv. 11,
the delicious hone3r of devotion and of the things
of God, imperceptibly, into the ears sometimes of
one, and sometimes of another, and pray secretly
to God, in your soul, that it would please him to
make this holy dew sink deep into the heart of
those that hear you.

Above all things, this angelical office must be
done meekly and sweetly ; not by way of correction,
but inspiration ; for it is surprising how powerfully
a sweet and amiable manner of proposing good
things attracts the hearts of the hearers.

Nevei\ therefore, soeak of God, or devotion, in 9


OF MODESTY IN OUR WORDS. 223

slight or thoughtless manner, hut rather with the
utmost attention and reverence. I give you this
advice, that you may avoid that remarkable vanity
which is found in many false devotees, who upon
every occasion speak words of piety and godliness
by way of entertainment, without ever thinking
of what they say, and afterwards falsely imagine
themselves to be very devout.


5^<


CHAPTER XXVII.

OF MODESfr IN OUR WORDS, AND THE RESPECT WE OWE TO
PERSONS.

WF any oifend not in words," says St. James, iii.
A 2, " he is a perfect man." Be careful never to
permit an indecent word to escape from your lips ;
for, although you do not speak it with an ill inten-
tion, yet it may be hurtful to those that hear it.
An evil word falling into a weak heart spreads
itself like a drop of oil falling on linen ; nay, it
sometimes seizes on the heart in such a manner
as to fill it with a thousand unclean thoughts and
temptations to lust ; for, as the poison of the body
enters by the mouth, so the poison of the heart
enters by the ear, and the tongue which utters an
indecent word is a murderer. For, although per-
haps the poison, which it has cast forth, has not
produced its effect, because it found the hearts of
the hearers guarded by some preservative, yet


224 A DEVOUT LIFE.

there wanted no malice in the tongue to occasion
their death. Let no man, therefore, tell me that
he has no evil intention ; for our Lord, the SearcL l
of hearts, has said, " That out of the abundance of
the heart, the mouth speaketh." But if we intend
no evil on such occasions, yet the enemy, who ia
of a contrary opinion, secretly uses immodest
ivords to pierce the heart of some one. As they
that have eaten the herb angelica have always a
sweet and agreeable breath, so they that have hon-
esty and chastity, which is an angelical virtue, in
their hearts, have their words always modest and
chaste. As for indecent and obscene things the
apostle will not have them even named amongst
us ; assuring us, "that nothing so much corruptetb
good manners as wicked discourse."

When immodest words are disguised with
affectation and subtility, then they become infi-
nitely more poisonous ; for, the more pointed the
dart is, the more easily it enters our bodies ; so,
also, the more pointed an obscene word is, the
more deeply does it penetrate the heart ; and if
they who esteem themselves men of gallantry for
speaking such words were convinced that in con ■
versation they should be like a swarm of bees,
convened together to collect honey from some
sweet and virtuous entertainment, they certainly
would not thus imitate a nest of wasps, assembled
together to suck corruption. If some impudent
person should address you in a lascivious manner,
convince him that your ears are offended, either by
turning yourself immediately away, or by such othei
mark of resentment as your discretion may direct.


OF MODESTY IX OUR WORDS. 225

To become a scoffer is one of the worst qualities
of a wit. God, who detests this vice, has hereto-
fore inflicted remarkable punishments on its per-
petrators. Nothing is so opposite to charity or
devotion as despising and contemning our neigh-
bor. As derision and mockery is never without
scoffing, therefore divines consider it is one of the
worst offences of which a man can be guilty against
his neighbor, by words ; for other offences may be
committed with some esteem of the party offended,
but by this he is treated with scorn and contempt.

As for certain good-humored jesting words,
spoken by way of modest and innocent mirth,
they belong to the virtue called Eutrapelia by the
Greeks, which we may denominate good conversa-
tion ; and by these Ave take an honest and friendly
recreation from those frivolous occasions with
which human imperfections furnish us. We must
be careful, however, not to pass from honest mirth
to scoffing ; for scoffing excites laughter in the way
of scorn a,nd contempt of our neighbor ; whereas
innocent mirth and drollery cause laughter by an
unoffending liberty, confidence, and familiar free-
dom, joined to the sprightly wit of some ingenious
conceit. St. Lewis, when the religious offered to
speak to him, after dinner, of high and sublime
matters, told them : rf It is not now a time to
allege texts, but to recreate ourselves with some
cheerful conceits ; let every man say whatever
innocent thing comes to his mind;'' this he said
when any of the nobility were present, to receive
marks of kindness from his majesty. But let us
vemember, Philothea, to pass our time of recrea-


226 A DEVOUT LIFE.

tion in such a manner that we may never lose
sight of the greatest of all concerns, Eternity.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

OF RASH JUDGMENT.

l^cUDGE not, and you shall not be judged," says
™ the Saviour of our souls ; " Condemn not, and
you shall not be condemned." St. Luke vi. 37.
"Judge not," says the holy apostle, "before the
time ; until the Lord come, who both will bring-
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest the counsels of the hearts." 1 Cor.
iv. 5. Oh, how displeasing are rash judgments
to God ! The judgments of the children of men
are rash, because they are not the judges of one
another, and therefore usurp to themselves the
office of our Lord. They are rash, because the
principal malice of sin depends on the intent in
the heart, which is an impenetrable secret to us.
They are not only rash, but also impertinent,
because every one will find sufficient employment
in judging himself, without taking upon him to
judge his neighbor. To avoid future judgment it
is as necessary to refrain from judging others as
to be careful to judge ourselves. For, as our Lord
forbids the one, so the apostle enjoins the others,
saying, that "if we judged ourselves we should
not be judged." But we act quite the contrary;


OF RASH JUDGMENT. 227

for, by judging our neighbor on every occasion,
we do that which is forbidden ; and, by not judg-
ing ourselves, we neglect to practise that which we
are strictly commanded.

The remedies against rash judgments must be
according to their different causes. There are
some hearts naturally so bitter and harsh as to
make everything bitter and harsh that they receive,
converting judgment, as the prophet Amos says,
into wormwood, by never judging their neighbors
except with all rigor and harshness. These must
seek the advice of a good spii tual physician, be-
cause this bitterness of heart, being natural to
them, is subdued with difficulty ; and though it
be not in itself a sin, but an imperfection only, yet
it is dangerous, because it introduces and causes
rash judgment and detraction to reign in the soul.
Some judge rashly, not through harshness, but
through pride, imagining, that in the same pro-
portion as they depress the honor of other men,
they raise their own. Arrogant and presumptuous
spirits, who admire and place themselves so high
in their own esteem, look on all others as mean
and abject. "I am not like the rest of men," said
the foolish Pharisee. Luke xviii. 11. Others,
who have not altogether this manifest pride, in-
dulge a certain satisfaction in considering the evil
qualities of other men, the more agreeably to con-
template, and make others admire the contrary
good qualities wherewith they think themselves
endowed ; for this complacency is so secret and
imperceptible as not to be discovered even by
those who are tainted therewith. Others to


228 A DEVOUT LIFE.

silence or assuage the remorse of their own con-
sciences, very willingly judge others to be guilty
of the same vices to which they themselves are
addicted, or of some other vices equally as great ;
thinking that the multitude of offenders diminishes
the guilt of the sin. Many take the liberty of
judging others rashly, merely for the pleasure of
delivering their opinion and conjectures on their
manners and humors, bv way of exercising their
wit ; and if, unhappily, they sometimes happen not
to err in their judgment, their rashness increases
to so violent an excess as to render it in a manner
impossible ever to effect their cure. Others judge
through passion and prejudice, always thinking
well of what they love, and ill of that which they
hate ; excepting in one case only, not less wonder-
ful than true, in which the excess of love incites
them to pass an ill judgment on that which they
love, — a paradoxical effect, which always proceeds
from an impure and distempered love ; and this is
jealousy, which, as every one knows, on account
of a mere look, or the least smile, condemns the
person beloved of disloyalty or adultery. In fine,
fear, ambition, and other similar weaknesses of the
mind, frequently contribute towards the breeding
of suspicious and rash judgments.

But what is remedy? As they who drink the
juice of the herb of ^Ethiopia, called ophiusa, im-
agine that they everywhere behold serpents and
other frightful objects ; so they who have imbibed
pride, envy, ambition, and hatred, think every-
thing they see evil and blamable. The former, to
be healed, must drink palm wine ; and I say to the


OF RASH JUDGMENT. 229

latter, drink copiously of the sacred wine of charity,
and it will deliver you from those noxious humors
that engender rash judgment. As charity is afraid
to meet evil, so she never seeks after it ; but
whenever it falls in her way she turns her face
aside, and does not notice it. At the firstaiarm of
evil she closes her eyes, and afterwards belie ves,
vith an honest simplicity, that it was not evil, but
jnly its shadow or apparition ; and if she cannot
avoid sometimes acknowledging it to be real evil
she quickly turns from it, and endeavors to forget
even its shadow. Charity is the sovereign remedy
for all evils, but for this especially. All things ap-
pear yellow to the eyes of those who are afflicted with
the jaundice ; and it is said, that to cure this evil
they must wear celandine under the soles of their
feet. The sin of rash judgment is indeed a spirit-
ual jaundice, and causes all things to appear evil
to the eyes of those who are infected ; he that
would be cured must not apply the remedies to
his eyes, or his understanding ; but to his affections,
which are the feet of the soul. If your affections
are mild, your judgment will also be mild ; if your
affections are charitable, your judgment will also
be charitable. I shall here present you with three
admirable examples : Isaac had said that Rebecca
was his sister; Abimelech saw him playing with
her, that is to say, caressing her in a tender man-
ner, Gen. xxvi. 8, and presently he thought she
was his wife. A malicious eye would rather have
judged her to have been his harlot, or, if she were
his sister, that he had been incestuous ; but Abime-
lech embraced the most charitable opinion he could


230 A DEVOUT LIFE.

concerning such an action. We must always de
the same, Philothea, judging as much as possible
in favor of our neighbors ; and, if one action could
bear a hundred faces, we should always consider
that which is the fairest.

Our blessed Lady was with child, Matt. i. 9,
and St. Joseph plainly perceived it ; but, on the
other hand, as he saw her holy, pure, and angeli-
cal, he could not believe she became pregnant in
an unlawful manner ; so that he resolved to leave
her privately, and commit the judgment of her
case to God ; and though the argument was well
calculated to make him conceive an ill opinion of
his virgin spouse, yet he would never judge her ;
and why ? Because, says the spirit of God, " he was
a just man." A just man, when he can no longer
excuse either the action, or the intention, of him
whom otherwise he sees to be virtuous, neverthe-
less will not judge him, but endeavors to forget it,
and leaves the judgment to God. Thus, our blessed
Saviour on the cross, Luke xxiii. 24, not being-
able to excuse entirely the sin of those that cruci-
fied him, extenuated the malice of it by alleging
their ignorance. When we cannot excuse the sin
let us at least render it worthy of compassion, at-
tributing it to the most favorable cause, such as
ignorance or infirmity.

But can we never judge our neighbor? ^No,
-rerily, never. It is God, O Philothea ! that judges
malefactors in public justice. It is true that he
uses the voice of judges to make himself intelligi-
ble to our ears ; they are his interpreters, and
ought to pronounce nothing but what they have


OF RASH JUDGMENT. 231

learnt of him, as being his oracles ; if they act
otherwise, by following their own passions, then,
indeed, it is they that judge, and who consequently
shall be judged ; for it is forbidden to men, in
quality of men, to judge others.

To see or know a thing is not to judge it; for
judgment, at least according to Scripture, pre-
supposes some difficult}', great or small, true or
apparent, which is to be decided; wherefore if
says, John iii. 18, that " He who believeth riot is
already judged," because there is no doubt of hi?
damnation. Is it not, then, a sin to doubt of oiu
neighbor? Xo, for we are not forbidden to doubt,
but to judge ; however, it is only allowable to
doubt or suspect as far as reason and arguments
may constrain us. otherwise our doubts and sus-
picions will be rash.

If some evil eye had seen Jacob when he kissed
Rachel by the well, or had seen Rebecca receive
bracelets and ear-rings from Eliezer, a man un-
known in that country, he would no doubt have
thought ill of these two patrons of chastity; but
without reason or foundation : for, when an action
is in itself indifferent, it is a rash suspicion to draw
an ill consequence from it, unless many circum-
stances give strength to the argument. It is also
a "ash judgment to draw an argument from an
action, in order to blame the person; but this 3
shall hereafter explain more clearly.

In line, those who have tender consciences an.
not very subject to rash judgment ; for, as thb
bees in misty or cloudy weather keep in their
hives to arrange their honev ; so the thoughts of


232 A DEVOUT LIFE.

good souls do not venture in search of objects that
lie concealed amidst the cloudy actions of their
neighbors ; but, to avoid meeting them, they retire
into their own hearts, to arrange the good resolu-
tions of their own amendments.

It is natural to an unprofitable soul to amuse
itself with examining the lives of other persons : J
except spiritual directors, fathers of families, mag-
istrates, etc., because a considerable part of theii
duty consists in watching over the conduct of
others ; let them discharge their duty with love,
and, having done this, they must then attend to
their own advancement in virtue.


CHAPTER XXIX.

OF DETRACTION.

^^ASH judgment engenders uneasiness, contempt
^^ of our neighbor, pride, self-complacency, and
many other most pernicious effects ; among which
detraction, the bane of conversation, holds the
first place. Oh that I possessed one of the burning
coals of the holy altar to touch the lips of men, so
that their iniquities might be taken away, and their
sin cleansed, in imitation of the seraphim that
purified the mouth of the prophet Isaias ! Isai. vi.
He that would deliver the world from detraction
would free it from a great number of sins.
Whoever robs his neighbor of his good name is


OF DETRACTION. 233

not only guilty of sin, but is also bound to make
reparation ; for no man can enter into heaven with
the goods of another ; and, amongst all exterior
goods, a good name is the best. Detraction is a
kind of murder; for we have three lives, viz., the
spiritual, which consists in the grace of God; the
corporal, which depends on the soul ; and the civil,
which consists in our good name : sin deprives us
of the first, death takes away the second, and
detraction robs us of the third. But the detractor
by one blow of his tongue commits three murders ;
he kills not only his own soul, and the soul of him
that hears \mi, but also, by a spiritual murder,
takes away the civil life of the person detracted ;
for, as St. Bernard says, both he that detracts and
he that hearkens to the detractor huve the devil
about them ; tlie one in his tongue, and the other
in his ear. David, speaking of detractors, says,
?f They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent."
ps. cxxxix. Now, as the serpent's tongue, ac-
cording to Aristotle, is forked, and has two points,
so is that of the detractor, who at one stroke stings
and poisons the ear of the hearer, and the reputation
of him against whom he is speaking.

I earnestly conjure you, then, dear Philothea,
never to detract any one, either directly or indi-
rectly ; beware of falsely imputing crimes and sins
to your neighbor ; of discovering his secret sins, or
of aggravating those that are manifest ; or of making
an evil interpretation of his good works ; or of
denying the good which you know that he possesses,
or dissembling it maliciously, or diminishing it by
words ; for in all these ways you wil 1 highly offend


234 A DEVOUT LIFE.

God , but, most of all, by false accusations, and
denying the truth to the prejudice of a third person ;
for it is a double sin to calumniate and injure
your neighbor at the same time.

They wiio preface detraction by protestations of
friendship and regard for the person detracted, or
who make apologies in his favor, are the most
subtle and venomous of all detractors. "I protest,"
say they, "I love him ; in every other respect he is
a worthy man ; but yet the truth must be told, he
was wrong to commit so treacherous an action.
She was very virtuous, but, alas ! she was sur-
prised," etc. Do you not perceive the artifice ? As
the dexterous archer draws the arrow as near as
possible to himself, that he may shoot the dart away
with greater force, so, when these detractors seem to
draw the detraction towards themselves, it is only
with i view to shoot it away with more violence,
that it may pierce more deeply into the hearts of
their hearers. But the detraction which is uttered
by way of a witty jest is still more cruel tlian all
the rest. For, as hemlock is not of itself a very
quack, but rather a slow, poison, which may be
easily remedied, yet being taken with wine is
incurable ; so detraction, which of itself might
pass lightly in at one ear, and out at the other,
remains in the minds of th^ hearers, when it is
couched under some subtle and merry jest. " The
venom of asps," says David, " is under their lips.''
The bite of the asp is almost imperceptible, and
its venom at first produced a delightful itching, by
means of which the heart and the bowels arp


OF DETRACTION". 235

expanded, and receive the poison ; against which
there is afterwards no remedy.

Say not such a one is a drunkard, because you
have seen him drunk ; nor that he is an adulterer,
because he has been surprised in that sin ; nor that
he is incestuous, because he has been guilty of that
abominable action ; for one act alone is not suffi-
cient to constitute a vice. The sun stood still once
in favor of the victoiy of Josue, and was darkened
another time in favor of that of our Saviour ; yet
none will say that the sun is either immovable or
dark. Noah was once drunk, and Lot another
time, and this latter also committed a great incest ;
yet neither the one nor the other was a drunkard,
nor was the latter an incestuous man. St. Peter
had not a sanguinary disposition, because he once
shed blood, nor was he a blasphemer, though he
once blasphemed. To acquire the name of a vice
or a virtue the action must be habitual ; one must
have made some progress in it. It is, then, an
injustice to say that such a man is passionate, or a
thief, because we have seen him once in a passion,
or guilty of stealing. Although a man may have
been along time vicious, yet we are in clanger of
accusing him falsely if we call him vicious.
Simon, the leper, called Magdalen a sinner, because
she had been so not long before ; yet he accused
her falsely, for she was then no longer a sinner,
but a most holy penitent ; and therefore our
Saviour took her cause under his protection. The
proud pharisee considered the humble publican as
a great sinner, or even perhaps an unjust man, an
adulterer, an extortioner; but was greatly deceived,


236 A DEVOUT LIFE.

for at that very time he was justified. Alas ! sinct
the goodness of God is so immense, thai one
moment suffices to obtain and receive his grace,
what assurance can we have that he who was
yesterday a sinner is not a saint to-day ? The day
that is past ought not to judge the day present,
or the present day judge that which is past ; it is
only the last day that judges all. We can, then,
never say a man is wicked without exposing
ourselves to the danger of lying; all that we can
say, if we must speak, is, that he did such bad
actions, or lived ill at such a time ; that he does ill
at present ; but we must never draw consequences
from yesterday to this day, nor from this day to
yesterday, much less to to-morrow.

Xow, though we must be extremely cautious of
speaking ill of our neighbor, yet we must avoid
the contrary extreme, into which some tall, who, to
avoid the sin of detraction, commend and speak
well of vice. If a person be, indeed, a detractor,
say not, in his excuse, he is a frank and free
speaker ; if a person be notoriously vain, say not
that he is genteel and elegant ; never call dan-
gerous familiarities by the name of simplicity and
innocence ; nor disobedience by the name of zeal ;
tor arrogance by the name of freedom ; nor lasciv-
ousness by the name of friendship. Xo, dear
Miilothea, we must not, in order to avoid the
vice of detraction, favor, flatter, or cherish vice :
but we must openly and freely speak of evil, and
blame that which is blamable ; for in doing this we
glorify God, provided we observe the following
conditions : —


OF DETRACTION. 237

To speak commendably against the vices of
another it is necessary that we should have in
view the profit either of the person spoken of, or
of those to whom we speak. For instance, when
the indiscreet or dangerous familiarities of such or
such persons are related in the company of young
maids ; or the liberties taken by this or that
person, in their words or gestures, are plainly
lascivious : if I do not freely blame the evil, but
rather excuse it, these tender souls, who hear of it,
will perhaps take occasion to allow themselves
some such like liberties. Their advantage, then,
requires that I should freely reprehend these
liberties upon the spot, unless I could reserve this
good office to be done better, and with less prej-
udice to the persons spoken of, on some other
occasion.

It is, moreover, requisite that it should be my
duty to speak on this occasion, as when I am one
of the chief of the company ; for, if I should keep
silence, I would seem to approve of the vice ; but
if I be one of the least, I must not take upon me to
pass my censure. But, above all, it is necessary
that I should be so cautious in my remarks as not
to say a single word too much. For example, if I
blame the familiarity of this young man, and that
young maid, because it is apparently indiscreet
and dangerous, o'ood God ! Philothea, I must hold
the balance so even as not to make the matter a
single grain heavier. Should there be but a slight
appearance, I will call it no more ; if a mere indis-
cretion, I would give it no worse name ; should
there be neither indiscretion, nor real appearance


238 A DEVOUT LIFE.

of evil, but only a probability that some malicious
spirit may take from thence a pretext to speak ill,
E will either say nothing at all, or say this only,
,md no more. My tongue, whilst I am speaking
of my neighbor, shall be in my mouth like a knife
in the hand of a surgeon, who would cut between
the sinews and the tendons. The blow I shall give
shall be neither more nor less than the truth. In
fine, it must be our principal care in blaming any
rice to spare, as much as possible, the person h\
Fvhom it is found.

It is true, we may speak freely of infamous
public and notorious sinners, provided it be in the
spirit of charity and compassion, and not with
arrogance and presumption, nor with complacency
in the evils of others, which is always the part of a
mean and abject heart. Amongst these, however,
the declared enemies of God and his Church, such
as the ringleaders of heretics and schismatics, must
be excepted, since it is charity to cry out against
the wolf, wherever he is, more especially when he
is among the sheep.

Every one takes the liberty to censure princes
and to speak ill of whole nations, according to the
different affections they bear them. Philothea,
avoid this fault ; for, besides the offence against
God, it may bring you into a thousand quarrels.

When you hear any one spoken ill of, make the
accusation doubtful, if you can do it justly ; if you
cannot, excuse the intention of the party accused:
if that cannot be done, express a compassion for
him, change the topic of conversation, remem-
bering yourself, and putting the company in mind,


ON CONVERSATION. 23C

that they who do not fall owe their happiness to
God alone ; recall the detractor to himself with
meekness, and declare some good action of the
party offended, if you know any.


CHAPTER XXX.

OTHER ADVICES WITH RESPECT TO CONVERSATION

W2-ZET your language be meek, open, and sincere,
AA without the least mixture of equivocations,
artifice, cr dissimulation ; for although it may not
be always advisable to say all that is true, yet it
is never allowable to speak against the truth.
Accustom yourself, therefore, never to tell a
deliberate lie, either by way of excuse or other-
wise ; remembering always that God is the God
of truth. Should you tell a lie inadvertently, fail
not to correct it upon the spot by some explanation
or reparation ; an honest excuse has always more
grace and force to bear one harmless than a lie.

Though one may sometimes prudently disguise
the truth by some equivocation, yet it must never
be done but when the glory and service ol God
manifestly require it ; in any other case, such
artifices are dangerous. The Holy Spirit dwells
not in a deceitful soul. (Wisd. l.) No artifice is
so good and desirable as plain-dealing : worldly
prudence and artifice belong to the children of
the world ; but the children of God walk uprightly.


240 A DEVOUT LIFE.

and their heart is without guile. K He that walked
sincerely," says the wise man, Prow x. 9, " waik-
eth confidently." Lying, double-dealing, and
dissimulation, are always signs of a weak and
mean spirit. St. Austin had said, in the fourth
book of his Confessions, that his soul and that of
his friend were but one soul ; and that he had a
horror for his life after the death of his friend,
because he was not willing to live by halves ;
and yet that for the same reason he was unwilling
to die, lest his friend should die wholly. These
Avords seemed to him afterwards so artful and
affected, that he recalled them, and censured them
in his book of Retractations. Observe, Philothea.
the exactness of this holy soul with respect to the
least artifice in his words. Fidelity, plainness,
and sincerity of speech are the greatest ornaments
of a Christian life : " I will take heed," says holy
David, "to my ways, that I may not sin with my
tongue. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth,
and a door round about my lips." It was the
advice of St. Lewis, in order to avoid contention,
not to contradict any one in discourse, unless it
were either sinful, or very prejudicial to acquiesce
to him. But should it be necessary to contradict
any one, or oppose our own opinion to his, we must
do it with much mildness and dexterity, so as not
to irritate his temper ; for nothing is ever gained
by harshness and violence.

To speak little, a practice so much recommended
by all wise men, does not consist in uttering few
words, but in uttering none that are unprofitable :
for in point of speaking one is not to regard the


PASTIMES AXD RECREATIONS. 241

quantity so much as the quality of the words ; but
in my opinion we ought to avoid both extremes.
For to be too reserved, and refuse to join in con-
versation, looks like disdain, or a want of confi-
dence ; and, on the other hand, to be always talk-
ing, so as to afford neither leisure nor opportunity
to others to speak when they wish, is a mark
of shallowness and levity.

St. Lewis condemned whispering in company,
and particularly at table, lest it should give others
occasion to suspect that some evil was spoken of
them. "He that is at table," said he, "in good,
company, and has something to say that is merry
and pleasant, should mention it so that all the
company may hear him : but if it be a thing of
importance, let him reserve it for a more suitable
occasion/'


CHAPTER XXXI.

OF PASTIMES AND RECREATIONS; AND, FIRST, OF SUCH AS ARE
LAWFUL AND COMMENDABLE

Y\T is necessary sometimes to relax our minds, as
^ well as our bodies, by some kind of recreation.
St. John the Evangelist, as Cassian relates,
amusing himself one day with a partridge on his
hand, was asked by a huntsman, how such a man
as he could spend his time in so unprofitable a
manner? To whom St. John replied: "Why
dost thou not carry thy bow always bent ? " — " Be-


242 A DEVOUT LIFE.

cause," answered the huntsman, "were it always
bent, I fear it would lose its spring and become use-
less."— ff Be not surprised, then," replied the apos-
tle, " that I should sometimes remit a little of my
close application and attention of mind to enjoy
some little recreation, that I may afterwards employ
myself more fervently in divine contemplation."
It is doubtless a defect to be so rigorous and aus-
tere as neither to be willing to take any recreation
ourselves, nor allow it to others.

To take the air, to walk, to entertain ourselves
with cheerful and friendly conversations, to play
on the lute or any other instrument, to sing to
music, or go hunting, are recreations so innocent,
that, in a proper use of them, there needs but that
common prudence which gives to everything its
due order, time, place, and measure.

Those games in which the gain serves as a
recompense for the dexterity and industry of the
body or of the mind, such as tennis ball, pall-mall,
running at the ring, chess, and backgammon, ar6
recreations in themselves good and lawful ; pro-
vided excess, either in the time employed in them,
or in the sum that is played for, be avoided ;
because, if too much time be spent in them, they
are no longer an amusement, but an occupation, in
which neither the mind nor the body is refreshed,
but on the contrary stupefied and oppressed.
After playing five or six hours at chess, the spirits
are altogetner fatigued and exhausted. To play
long at tennis is not to recreate, but fatigue, the
body ; and if the sum played for be too great, the
affections of the players become irregular ; besides.


OF PROHIBITED GAMES. 243

it is unjust to hazard so much upon skill of so little
importance as that which is exercised at play.
But, above all, Philothea, take particular care not
to set your affections upon these amusements ; for
how innocent soever any recreation may be, when
we set our hearts upon it, it becomes vicious. I
do not say that you must take no pleasure whilst
at play, for then it would be no recreation ; but I
say you must not fix your affection on it, nor
spend too much time in it, nor be too eager after it.


CHAPTER XXXII.

OF PROHIBITED GAMES.

E games of dice, cards, and the like, in which
the gain depends principally on hazard, are
not only dangerous recreations, as dancing, but
are, of their own nature, bad and reprehensible ;
hence they have been forbidden by the laws, as
well ecclesiastical as civil. You will say, perhaps,
what great harm can there be in them? The evil
consists in this, that the gain is not acquired at
these games according to reason, but chance,
which often falls upon him whose ability or
industry deserves nothing ; and such a proceeding
is repugnant to reason. But you will say, it is
according to the agreement of the parties. That
serves indeed to show that the winner does no wrong
to the loser, but it justifies neither the agreement


244 A DEVOUT LIFE.

nor the game ; for the gain, which ought to be the
recompense of industry, is made the reward of
chance, which deserves no reward whatever, since
it depends not at all upon us. Besides, although
these games bear the name of recreations, yet they
are by no means recreations, but tiresome occupa-
tions, for is it not tiresome to keep the mind
incessantly occupied by an unremitted attention,
and provoked by perpetual apprehensions and solici-
tudes? Can there be any attention more painful,
gloomy, or melancholy, than that of gamesters?
You must neither speak, laugh, nor cough, whilst
the}' are at play, for fear of giving offence. In
fact, there is no joy at play but when you win ;
and is not that joy iniquitous which cannot be
felt but by the loss or displeasure of a friend or
companion? Surely such satisfaction is infamous.
For these three reasons this kind of gaming is
prohibited.

St. Lewis, hearing that his brother, the Count of
Anjou, and Monsieur Gautier de Xemours, were
gaining, arose from his bed, to which he was
confined by sickness, went staggering to their
chamber, and taking the tables, the dice, and part
of the money, threw them out of the window into
the sea. The holy and chaste damsel, Sara,
speaking in prayer to God, brings this argument
of her innocency : "Thou knowest, O Lord, that 1
have never joined myself with them that play/'
Tob. iii.


BALLS AND PASTIMES. 245

CHAPTER XXXIII.

OF BALLS, AND PASTIMES WHICH ARE LAWFUL, BUT DANGEROUS.

'c^T|LTH01jGH balls and dancing be recreations
^^ of their own nature indifferent, yet, on account
of the manner in which they are generally con-
ducted, they preponderate very much on the side
of evil, and are consequently extremely dangerous.
Being generally carried on in the darkness and
obscurity of night, it is by no means surprising
that several vicious circumstances should obtain
easy admittance, since the subject is of itself so
susceptible of evil. The votaries of these amuse-
ments, by sitting up late at night, disable them-
selves from discharging their duty to God on the
following morninff. Is it not, then, a kind of
madness to exchange the day for the night,
light for darkness, and good works for criminal
fooleries ? Every one strives who shall carry the
most vanity to the ball ; and vanity is so con-
genial, as well to evil affections, as to dangerous
familiarities, that both are easily engendered by
dancing.

I have the same opinion of dances, Philothea,
that physicians have of mushrooms : as the best of
them, in their opinion, are good for nothing, so
1 tell you the best balls are good for nothing. If,
nevertheless, you must eat mushrooms, be sure that
they are well dressed. If upon some occasion,
which you cannot well avoid, you must go to a


246 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ball, see that your dancing be properly conducted.
But you will ask me how must it be conducted?
I answer, with modesty, gravity, and a good
intention. Eat but sparingly, and seldom of
mushrooms, say the physicians, for, how well
soever they may be dressed, the quantity makes
them poisonous ; dance but little, and very seldom, I
say, Philothea, lest otherwise you put yourself
in danger of contracting an affection for it.

Mushrooms, according to Pliny, being spongy
and porous, easily attract infection to themselves
from the things which surround them ; so that
being near serpents and toads, they imbibe their
poison. Balls, dancing, and other nocturnal meet-
ings, ordinarily attract the reigning vices and sins
together, such as quarrels, envy, scoffing, and
wanton love ; and as these exercises open the pores
of the bodies of those that use them, so they also
open the pores of their heart, and expose them to
the danger of some serpent, seizing the favorable
opportunity to breathe some loose words or lasciv-
ious suggestions into the ear, or of some basilisk
casting an impure look, or wanton glance of love
into the heart, which, being thus opened, is easily
seized upon and poisoned. O Philothea! these
idle recreations are ordinarily very dangerous ;
they extinguish the spirit of devotion, and leave
the soul in a languishing condition ; they cool the
fervor of charity, and excite a thousand evil af-
fections in the soul ; and therefore they are not to
be used but with the greatest caution.

But physicians say, tha: after mushrooms we
c?ust diink o-ooa wmc i and I say, that after


BALLS AND PASTIMES. 247

dancing it is necessary to refresh our souls with
some good and holy considerations, to prevent the
baneful effects of those dangerous impressions
which the vain pleasure taken in dancing may
have left in our minds. But what considerations?
1. Consider that, during the time you were at
the ball, innumerable souls were burning in the
names of hell, for the sins which they had com-
mitted or occasioned by their dancing. 2. That
many religious and devout persons of both sexes
were at the very time in the presence of God,
singing his praises, and contemplating his beauty.
Ah ! how much more profitably was their time
employed than yours ! 3. That, whilst you were
dancing, many souls departed out of this world in
great anguish, and that thousands of men and
women were then suffering dreadful pains in their
beds, in hospitals, in the streets, by painful dis-
tempers, or burning fevers. Alas ! they had no
rest, and will you have no compassion for them?
And do you not think that you shall one day groan,
as they did, whilst others shall dance as you did?
4. That our blessed Saviour, his virgin Mother,
the angels and saints, beheld you at the ball. Ah !
how greatly did they pity you, seeing your heart
pleased with so vain an amusement, and taken up
with such childish toys ! 5. Alas ! whilst you
were there time was passing away, and Death
was approaching nearer ; behold how he mocks
you, and invites you to his dance, in which the
sighs of your friends shall serve for the music, and
where you shall make but one step from this life
to the next. The dance of death is, alas I the true


248 A DEVOUT LIFE.

pastime of mortals, since by it we instantly pass
from the vain amusements of this world to the
eternal pains or pleasures of the next. I have set
you down these little considerations : God will
suggest to you many more of a similar nature,
provided you fear him.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

AT WHAT TIME YOU MAY PLAY OR DANCE.

WS order that playing and dancing may be law-
^ ful we must use them as a recreation, without
having any affection for them ; we may use them
for a short time, but we should not continue till
we are wearied or stupefied with them ; and we
must use them but seldom, lest we should other-
wise turn a recreation into an occupation. But
on what occasions may we lawfully play and
dance? Just occasions of innocent games are
frequent, whilst those of hazard are rare, on
account of their being more blamable and dan-
gerous : wherefore, in one word, dance and play
as your own prudence and discretion may direct
you, to comply with the civil request of the
jompany in which you are engiged : for conde-
scension is a branch of charity which makes
indifferent things good, and dangerous things
allowable ; it even takes away the harm from those
things that are in some measure evil ; and therefore


FIDELITY ON ALL OCCASIONS. 249

games of hazard, which otherwise would be rep-
rehensible, are not so if we use them sometimes
through a just condescension.

I was very much pleased to read, in the life of
St. Charles Borromeo, how he condescended to the
Swiss in certain things, in which otherwise he was
very strict; and that St. Ignatius, of Loyola,
being invited to play, did not refuse. As to
St. Elizabeth, of Hungary, she played and danced
sometimes, when she was present at assemblies of
recreation, without any prejudice to her devotion ;
for devotion was so deeply rooted in her soul, that
as the rocks about the lake of Eietta grow larger
by the beating of the waves, so her devotion
increased among the pomps and vanities to which
her condition exposed her. Great tires increase
by the wind ; but little ones are soon blown out,
if we carry them uncovered.


--oo^c


CHAPTER XXXV.

THAT WE MUST EE FAITHFUL, BOTH ON GREAT AND SMALL
OCCASIONS.

£HE sacred Spouse in the canticle says, that
his Spouse has wounded " his heart with one
of her eyes, and with one hair of her neck." Now,
among all the exterior parts of the human body,
none is more noble, either for its construction or
activity, than the eye, and none more inconsiderable


250 A DEVOUT LIFE.

than the hair. Wherefore the divine Spouse would
give us to understand, that he is pleased to accept
not only the great works of devout persons, but
also the least and most trivial ; and that, to serve
him as he desires, we must take care to serve him
well, not only in great and important things, but in
those that are small and unimportant ; since we
may equally by the one and the other wound his
heart with love.

Prepare yourself, then, Philothea, to suffer
many great afflictions, even martyrdom itself, for
our Lord ; resolve to surrender to him whatever
is most dear to you, when it shall please him to
take it ; father, mother, husband, wife, brother,
sister, children; yea, even your eyes, or your
life ; for to all these sacrifices you ought to prepare
your heart. But as long as divine Providence
sends vou not afflictions so sensible or so great,
since he requires not your e}res, give him at least
your hair. I mean, suffer meekly those small
injuries, trifling inconveniences, and inconsiderable
losses, which daily befall you ; for by means of
such little circumstances as these, managed with
love and affection, you will engage his heart
entirely, and make it all your own. These little
daily charities ; this headache, or toothache ; this
cold ; this perverse humor of a husband or wife ;
this breaking of a glass ; this contempt of scorn ?
this loss of a pair of gloves, of a ring, or a hand-
kerchief; those little inconveniences which we
suffer by retiring to rest at an early hour, and
rising early to pray or communicate ; that little
bashfulness we have m performing certain acts of


FIDELITY ON ALL OCCASIONS. 251

devotion in public ; in short, all these trivial
sufferings, being accepted, and embraced with
love, are highly pleasing to the divine goodness,
who for a cup of cold water only has promised an
eternal reward to his faithful servants. Wherefore,
as these occasions present themselves every mo-
ment, to employ them to advantage will be a great
means to heap up a store of spiritual riches.

When I saw in the life of St. Catharine, of Sienna,
her many raptures and elevations of spirit, so many
Avords of wisdom, nay, even profound instructions
uttered by her, I doubted not but that, with the
eye of contemplation, she had ravished the heart
of her heavenly Spouse. But I was no less com-
forted when I found her in her father's kitchen,
humbly turning the spit, kindling the tire, dressing
the meat, kneading the bread, and performing the
meanest offices of the house, with a courage full of
love and affection towards her God ; for I esteem
no less the little and humble meditations she made
in the midst of these mean and abject employments
than the ecstasies and raptures she so often enjoyed,
which were perhaps granted to her only -in recom-
pense of her humility and abjection. Her manner
of meditating was as follows : whilst she was dress-
ing the meat for her father she imagined that, like
another St. Martha, she was preparing it for our
Saviour, and that her mother held the place of the
blessed Virgin, and her brothers that of the apos-
tles ; exciting herself in this manner to serve the
whole court of heaven in spirit, whilst she em-
ployed herself with great delight in these humble
services, because she knew that such was the will


252 A DEVOUT LIFE.

of God. I have adduced this example, Philothea,
that you may know of what importance it is to di-
rect all your actions, how inconsiderable soever
they may be. with a pure intention, to the service
of his divine Majesty.

Wherefore I earnestly advise you to imitate the
valiant woman whom the great Solomon so highly
commends ; " she hath put out her hands," he says,
"to strong things" ; that is, to high, generous, and
important things, and yet disdained not to " take
hold of the spindle." Prov. xxxi. Put out your
hand to strong things, exercise yourself in prayer
and meditation, in frequenting the sacraments, in
exciting souls to the love of God, and infusing
good inspirations into their hearts, and, in a word,
in the performance of great and important works,
according to your vocation ; but never forget your
distaff or spindle ; or. in other words, take care to
practise these low and humble virtues, which grow
like flowers at the foot of the cross ; such as serv-
ing the poor, visiting the sick, taking care of your
family, and attending to all your domestic con-
cerns, with that profitable diligence which will
not suffer you to be idle ; and, amidst all these oc-
cupations, mingle considerations similar to those I
have related above of St. Catharine.

Great occasions of serving God present them-
selves seldom ; but little ones, frequently. " Now
he that shall be faithful in small matters," says our
Saviour, " shall beset over great things. Perform
all things, then, in the name of God, and you will
do all things well ; whether you eat, drink, sleep,
recreate yourself, or turn the spit, provided you


ON REASONING JUSTLY. 253

know how to refer all your actions to God, you
will profit much in the sight of his divine Majesty-


CHAPTER XXXVI.

THAT WE MUST KEEP OUR MIND JUST AND REASONABLE.

WH is reason alone that makes us men, and yet
^ it is a rare thing to find men truly reasonable ;
because self-love ordinarily puts us out of the
paths of reason, leading us insensibly to a thousand
small, yet dangerous, injustices and partialities ;
which, like the little foxes spoken of in the Canti-
cles, destroy the vines ; for, because they are lit-
tle, we take no notice of them ; but, being great in
number, they fail not to injure us considerably.

Are not the things of which I am about to speak
unjust and unreasonable? We condemn every
trifle in our neighbors, and excuse ourselves in
things of importance ; we want to sell very dearly
and to buy very cheaply ; we desire that justice
should be executed in another man's house, but
mercy and connivance in our own ; we would have
everything we say taken in good part, but we are
delicate and touchy with regard to what others say
of us ; we would insist on our neighbor parting
with his goods, and taking our money ; but is it
lot more reasonable that he should keep his goods,
and leave us our money ? We take it ill that he
•vill not accommodate us ; but has he not more


254 A DEVOUT LIFE.

reason to be offended that we should desire to in-
commode him ?

If we love one particular exercise we despise
all others, and set ourselves against everything
that is not according to our own taste. If there
be any of our inferiors who is not agreeable, or
to whom we have taken once a dislike, Ave find
fault with all that he does, and we cease not on
every occasion to mortify him. On the contrary,
if the conduct of any one be agreeable to us, he
can do nothing that we are not willing to excuse.
There are some virtuous children, whom their
parents can scarcely abide to see, on account of
some bodily imperfections ; and there are others
that are vicious, who are favorites, on account of
some corporal gracefulness. On all occasions we
prefer the rich before the poor, although they be
neither of better condition, nor more virtuous ;
we even prefer those who are best clad. We
rigorously exact our own dues, but we desire that
others should be gentle in demanding theirs ; we
keep our own rank with precision, but would have
others humble and condescending ; we complain
easily of our neighbor, but none must complain
of us ; what we do for others seems always very
considerable, but what others do for us seems as
nothing. In a word, we are like the partridges
in Paphlagonia, which have two hearts ; for we
have one heart, mild, favorable, and courteous
towards ourselves, and another hard, severe, and
rigorous towards our neighbor. We have two
balances ; one to weigh out to our own advantage,
ind t^ ^ther to weio'h in to the detriment of out


ON REASONING JUSTLY. 255

neighbor. " Deceitful lips," says the Scripture,
Ps. xi. 3, "have spoken with a double heart," viz.,
two hearts ; and to have two weights, the one
greater, with which we receive, and {he other less,
with which we deliver out, is an abominable thing
in the sight of God. Deut. xxv. 13.

Philothea, in order to perform all your actions
with equity and justice, you must exchange situa-
tions with your neighbor ; imagine yourself the
seller whilst you are buying, and the buyer whilst
you are selling ; and thus you will sell and buy
according to justice and equity ; for, although
small injustices, which exceed not the limits of
rigor, in selling to our advantage, may not oblige
to restitution ; yet being defects contrary to reason
and charity, we are certainly obliged to correct
and amend them ; at best, they are nothing but
mere illusions ; for, believe me, a man of a gen-
erous, just, and courteous disposition is never on
the losing side. Neglect not, then, Philothea,
frequently to examine whether your heart be such
with respect to your neighbor as you would desire
his to be with respect to you, were you in his
situation; for this is the touchstone of true reason.
Trajan, being blamed by his confidants for making
the imperial majesty, as they thought, too ac-
cessible, said, " Ought I not to be such an em-
peror towards private men as I would desire an
emperor to be towards me were I myself a private
man ? "


256 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER XXXVII.

CF DESIRES.

Y^VERY one knows that Ave are obliged to re-
A& frain from the desire of vicious things, since
even the desire of evil is of itself criminal ; but
I tell you, moreover, Philothea, you must not be
anxious after balls, plays, or the like diversions,
nor covet honors and offices, nor even visions and
ecstasies ; for there is a great deal of danger, deceit,
and vanity in such things. Desire not that which
is at a great distance, nor that which cannot happen
for a long time, as many do, who, by this means,
weary and distract their hearts unprofitably. If a
young man earnestly desires to be settled in some
office, before the proper time, what does all his
anxiety avail him? If a married woman desires
to be a nun, to what purpose? If I desire to buy
my neighbor's goods before he is willing to sell
them, is it not a loss of time to entertain this
desire? If, whilst I am sick, I desire to preach,
to celebrate mass, to visit others that are sick,
and perform the exercises of those who are in
health, are not all these desires in vain, since it
is out of my power to put them in execution?
Yet in the meantime these unprofitable desires
occupy the place of the virtues of patience, resig-
nation, mortification, obedience, and meekness
under sufferings, which is what God wishes me to
practise at that time ; but we are often in the con-


OX DESIRES. 257

dition of those who long for cherries in autumn,
and grapes in the spring.

I can by no means approve that persons should
desire to amuse themselves in any other kind of
life than that in which they are already engaged ;
nor in any exercises that are incompatible with
their present condition : for this dissipates the
heart, and makes it unfit for its necessary occu-
pations. If I desire to practise the solitude of a
Carthusian, I lose my time ; and this desire occu-
pies the place of that which I ought to have to
employ myself well in my actual state. Xo, I
would not that any one should even desire to have
more talents or judgment than he is already
possessed of ; for these desires are not only use-
less, but moreover occupy the place of those
which every one ought to have, of cultivating the
genius he inherits from nature ; nor should am
one desire those means to serve God which he has
not, but rather diligently employ those which he
has. Now, this is to be understood only of desires
which totally occupy the heart ; for, as to simple
wishes, if they be not too frequent, they do no
harm whatever.

Desire not crosses but in proportion to the
patience with which you have supported those
which have been already sent you ; for it is pyre-
sumptuous to desire martyrdom, and not have the
courage to bear an injury. The enemy often sug-
gests a great desire of things that are absent,
and which shall never occur, so that he may
divert our mind from present objects, from which,
however trivial they may be, we might obtain


258 A DEVOUT LIFE.

considerable profit to ourselves. We fight wit*
the monsters of Africa, in imagination ; and, in
the meantime, for want of attention, we suffer
ourselves to be killed by every insignificant rep-
tile that lies in our way. Desire not temptations,
for that would be rashness ; but accustom your
heart to expect them courageously, and to defend
yourself against them when they shall come.

A variety of food, taken in any considerable
quantity, overloads the stomach, and, if it be
weak, destroys it ; overcharge not then, your
soul, either with a multitude of worldly desires,
which may end in your ruin ; or even with such
as are spiritual, as they are apt to produce dis-
tractions. When the purified soul finds herself
freed from bad humors she feels a craving after
.spiritual things ; and, as one famished, she longs
after a variety of exercises of piety, mortifica-
tion, penance, humility, charity, and prayer.
Philothea, it is a sign of good health to have a
keen appetite ; but you must consider whether
you can well digest all that you wish to eat.
Amongst so many desires, choose, then, by the
advice of your spiritual father, such as you can
execute at present, and turn them to the best
advantage afterwards ; God will send you others,
which you may also practise in their proper sea-
son ; and thus you will never lose your time in
unprofitablfi desires, but bring them all forth in
good order ; but as to those which cannot be
immediately executed, they should be reserved
in some corner of the heart, till their time come.
This advice I not only give to spiritual persons.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS. 259

but also to those of the world ; for, without at-
tending to it, we could not live without anxiety
and confusion.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS.

MftATRIMONY is a great Sacrament, but I speak
*$A in Christ, and in the Church," Eph. v. 32-
[t is honorable to all persons, in all persons, and
in all things, that is, in all its parts. To all per-
sons, because even virgins ought to honor it
with humility ; in all persons, because it is equally
holy in the rich and poor; in all things, because
its origin, its end, its advantages, its form, and
its matter are all holy. It is the nursery of
Christianity, which supplies the earth with faithfu7
souls, to complete the number of the elect in
heaven ; in a word, the preservation of marriage
is of the highest importance to the commonwealth-
for it is the origin and source of all its streams.

Would to God that his most beloved Son were
invited to all marriages, as he was to that of
Cana ; then the Avine of consolations and bene-
dictions would never be wanting ; for the reason
why there is commonly a scarcity of it at the
beginning is, because Adonis is invited instead
of Jesus Christ, and Venus instead of his blessed
Mother. He that would have his lambs fair and
spotted as Jacob's were, must, like him, set fair


260 A DEVOUT LIFE.

rods of divers colors before the sheep when they
meet to couple ; and he that would have a happy
success in marriage ought in his espousals to
represent to himself the sanctity and dignity of
this sacrament. But, alas ! instead of this there
are a thousand disorders committed in diversions,
feasting, and immodest discourse ; it is not sur-
prising, then, that the success of marriages should
not correspond. Above all things, I exhort
married people to that mutual love which the
Holy Ghost so much recommends in the Scripture.

0 you that are married ! I tell you not to love
each other with a natural love, for it is thus that
the turtles love ; nor do I say, love one another
with a human love, for the heathens do this ; but

1 say to you, after the great Apostle, "Husbands,
love your wives, as Christ also loved the Church."
Eph. v. And you, wives, love your husbands, a?
the Church loveth her Saviour. It was God that
brought Eve to our first father, Adam, and gave
her him in marriage ; it is also God, O my friends ?
who, with his invisible hand, has tied the knot of
the holy bond of your marriage, and given you to
one another; why do you not, then, cherish each
other with a holy, sacred, and divine love?

The first effect of this love is an indissoluble
union of your hearts. Two pieces of fir glued
together, if the glue be good, cleave so fast to
each other that they can be more easily broken
in any other place than that in which they were
joined. But God joins the husband to the wife
with his own blood ; for which cause this union
is so strong that the soul must sooner separate


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS. 261

from the body of the one or the other, than the
husband from the wife. Now, this union is not
understood principally of the body, but of the
heart, of the affection, and of the love.

The second effect of this love ought to be the
inviolable fidelity of one party to the other.
Seals were anciently graven upon rings worn
on the fingers, as the holy Scripture itself testi-
fies. Behold, then, the mystery of this ceremony
in marriage. The Church, which by the hand
of the priest blesses a ring, and gives it first to
the man, testifies that she puts a seal upon his
heart by this sacrament, to the end that hence-
Forward neither the name nor the love of any
other woman may enter therein, so long as she
shall live who has been o-jven to him; after-
ward the bridegroom puts the ring on the hand
of the bride, that she reciprocally may under-
stand that her heart must never admit an affection
to any other man, so long as he shall live upon
earth whom our Lord here gives her for a
husband.

The third fruit of marriage is the lawful pro-
duction and education of children. It is a great
honor to you that are married, that God, design-
ing to multiply souls, which may bless and praise
him to all eternity, makes you cooperate with
him in so noble a work, by the production of the
bodies, into which he infuses immortal souls,
like heavenly drops, as he creates them.

Preserve, then, O husbands ! a tender, con-
stant, and cordial love for your wives ; for the
woman was taken from that side of the first man


262 A DEVOUT LIFE.

which was nearest his heart, to the end she
might be loved by him cordially and tenderly.
The weaknesses and infirmities of your wives,
whether in body or mind, ought never to pro-
voke you to any kind of disdain, but rather to a
mild and affectionate compassion ; since God has
created them such, to the end that, depending
upon you, you should receive from them more
honor and respect, and that you should have
them in such manner for your companions, that
nevertheless your should be their heads and su-
periors. And you, O wives ! love tenderly and
cordially the husbands whom God has given
you, but with a respectful love, and full of rev-
erence ; for therefore did God create them of a
sex more vigorous and predominant ; and was
pleased to ordain that the woman should de-
pend upon the man, being bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, and that she should be made
of a rib taken from under his arm, to show that
she ought to be under the hand and guidance
of her husband. The holy Scripture, which
strictly recommends to you this subjection, ren-
ders it also agreeable, not only by prescribing
that you should accommodate yourselves to it
with love, but also by commanding your hus-
bands to exercise it over you with charity, ten-
derness, and complacency. "Husbands," says St.
Peter, "dwell with your wives according to
knowledge, giving honor to the woman as to
the weaker vessel." 1 Epist. iii. 7.

But while I exhort you to advance more and
more in this mutual love, which you owe one


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS. 263

another, beware lest it degenerate into any
kind of jealousy ; for it often happens, that as
the worm is bred in the apple which is the most
delicate and ripe, so jealousy grows in that love
of married people which is the most ardent and
affectionate, of which, nevertheless, it spoils and
corrupts the substance, breeding, by insensible
degrees, strifes, dissensions, and divorces. But
jealousy is never seen where the friendship is
reciprocally grounded on solid virtue : it is, there-
fore, an infallible mark that the love is in some
degree sensual and gross, and has met with a
virtue imperfect, inconstant, and subject to dis-
trust. Jealousy is an absurd means of proving
the sincerity of friendship. It may, indeed, be a
sign of the greatness of the friendship, but never
of its goodness, purity, and perfection ; since the
perfection of friendship presupposes an assur-
ance of the virtue of those whom we love, and
jealousy presupposes a doubt of it.

If you desire, O husbands ! that your wives
should be faithful to you, give them a lesson by
your example. "How," says St. Gregory Na-
zianzen, fr can you exact purity of your wives,
when you yourselves live in impurity? How
can you require of them that which you give
them not? Do you wish them to be chaste?
behave yourselves chastely towards them : and,
as St. Paul says, f let every man know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification.' Bat if, on
the contrary, you yourselves teach them not U
be virtuous, it is not surprising if you are dis
graced by their perdition. But you, O wives 1


264 A DEVOUT LIFE.

whose honor is inseparably joined with purity
and modesty, be zealous to preserve this your
glory, and suffer no kind of loose behavior to
tarnish the whiteness of your reputation." Fear
all kinds of assaults, how small soever they may
be ; never suffer any wanton addresses to ap-
proach you : whoever presumes to praise your
beauty, or your general behavior, ought to be
suspected ; for he that praises the ware which
he cannot buy is strongly tempted to steal it,
but if to your praise he adds the dispraise of
your husband, he offers you a heinous injury ;
for it is evident that he not only desires to ruin
you, but accounts you already half lost, since
the bargain is half made with the second mer-
chant when one is disgusted with the first.

"Ladies formerly, as well as now, were accus-
tomed to wear ear-rings of pearl, for the pleasure,"
says Pliny, " which they derh^e from hearing them
jingle against each other." But for my part, as
I know that the great friend of God, Isaac, sent
ear-rings, as the first earnest of his love, to the
chaste Rebecca, I believe that this mysterious
ornament signifies that the first part which a
husband should take possession of in his wife,
and which his wife should faithfully keep for him,
is her ears : in order that no other lano'ua^e or
noise should enter there but only the sweet and
amiable music of chaste and pure words, which
are the oriental pearls of the gospel ; for Ave must
always remember that souls are poisoned by the
3ar, as the body is by the mouth.

Love and fidelity joined together always pro-


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS. 265

duee familiarity and confidence ; and therefore
the saints have used many reciprocal caresses
in their marriage ; caresses truly affectionate,
but pure, tender, and sincere. Thus, Isaac and
Rebecca, the most chaste married couple of
antiquity, were seen through a window caress-
ing one another in such manner that, though
there was do immodesty, Abimeicch was con-
vinced that they could be do other than man
and wife. The great St. Lewis, equally rigor-
ous to his own flesh, and tender in the love of
his wife, was almost blamed for the abundance
of such caresses ; though, indeed, he rather de-
served praise for being able to bring his martial
and courageous spirit to stoop to these little du-
des so requisite for the preservation of conjugal
love ; for, although these demonstrations of pure
and free affection oind not the hearts, yet the}
tend to unite them, and serve for an agreeable
disposition to mutual conversation.

St. Monica, being pregnant of the great St.
Augustine, dedicated him by frequent oblations
to the Christian religion, and to the service
and glory of God, as he himself testifies, saying,
that "he had already tasted the salt of God in
his mother's womb." This is a great lesson for
Christian women, to offer up to his divine Maj-
esty the fruit of their wombs, even before they
come into the world ; for God, who accepts the
offerings of an humble and willing heart, com-
monly at that time seconds the affections of moth-
ers ; witness Samuel, St. Thomas of Aquin, St.
Andrew of Fiesola, and many others The


266 A DEVOUT LIFE.

Mother of St. Bernard, a mother worthy of such
a son, as soon as her children were born, took
them in her arms, and offered them up to Jesus
Christ ; and, from that moment, she loved them
with respect as things consecrated to God and
entrusted by him to her care. This pious custom
was so pleasing to God that her seven children
became afterwards eminent for sanctity. But
when children begin to have the use of reason,
both their fathers and mothers ought to take
great care to imprint the fear of God in their
hearts. The devout queen Blanche performed
this duty most fervently with regard to St.
Lewis, her son. She often said to him, "I would
much rather, my dear child, see you die before
my eyes, than see you commit only one mortal
sln.v This caution remained so deeply engraved
in his soul that, as he himself related, not one
day of his life passed in which he did not re-
meiiber it, and take all possible care to observe
it faithfully. Families and generations are, in
our language, called houses ; and even the He-
brews called the generations of children the
building up of a house ; for, in this sense, it is
said that God built houses for the mid wives of
Egypt. Now, this is to show that the raising
of a house, or family, consists not in stoiing up a
quantity of worldly possessions, but in the good
education of children in the fear of God, and in
virtue, in which no pains or labor ought to be
spared; for children are the crown of their- par-
ents. Thus, St. Monica fought with so much
"ervor and constancy against the evil inclination


INSTRUCTIONS FOR MARRIED PERSONS. 267

of her son St. Augustine, that, having followed
him by sea and land, she made him more hap-
pily the child of her tears, by the conversion of
his soul, than he had been of her blood, by the
generation of his body.

St. Paul leaves to wives the care of the house-
hold concerns as their portion, for which reason
many think with truth that their devotion is more
profitable to the family than that of the husband,
who, not residing so among the domestics, cannot
of consequence so easily frame them to virtue.
On this consideration Solomon, in his Proverbs,
makes the happiness of the whole family depend
on the care and industry of the valiant woman
whom he describes.

It is said, in the book of Genesis, that Isaac, see-
ing his wife Rebecca barren, prayed to the Lord
for her ; or, according to the Hebrew, prayed to
the Lord opposite to her, because the one prayed
on the one side of the oratory, and the other on
the other ; and the prayer of the husband offered
in this manner was heard. Such union as this of
the husband and wife, in holy devotion, is the best
and most fruitful of all ; and to this they ought
mutually to encourage and to enano-e each other.
There are fruits, as, for example, the quince,
which, on account of the bitterness of their juice,
are not agreeable unless they are preserved with
sugar; there are others, which, on account of their
tenderness, cannot be long kept, unless they are
preserved in like manner, such as cherries and
apricots ; thus, wives ought to wish that their hus-
bands should be preserved with the sugar of devo-


268 A DEVOUT LIFE.

tion ; for a man without devotion is severe, harsh,
and rough. And husbands ought to wish that
their wives should be devout, because without
devotion a woman is very frail, and liable to
obscure, and perhaps to lose, her virtue. St.
Paul says " that the unbelieving husband is sanc-
tified by the believing wife ; and the unbelieving
wife is sanctified by the believing husband " ;
because, in this strict alliance of marriage, the one
may easily draw the other to virtue ; but what a
blessing is it when the man and wife, being both
believers, sanctify each other in the true fear of
God !

As to the rest, their mutual bearing with each
other ought to be so great that they should never
be both angry with each other at the same time, so
that a dissension or debate be never seen between
them. Bees cannot stay in a place where there
are echoes or rebounding of voices ; nor can the
Holy Ghost remain in a house in which there are
reboundings of clamor, strife, and contradictions.
St. Gregory Nazianzen tells us, that in his time
married people made a feast on the anniversary
day of their wedding. For my part, I should
approve of the reviving of this custom, provided it
w7ere not attended with preparations of worldly
and sensual recreations ; but that the husband and
wife should confess and communicate on that day,
and recommend to God, with a more than ordinary
fervor, the happy progress of their marriage ;
renewing their good purposes to sanctify it still
more and more by mutual love and fidelity, and
recovering breath, as it were, in our Lord, in


SANCTITY OF THE MARRIAGE BED. 269


order to support with more ease the burdens of
their calling.


:>**c


CHAPTER XXXIX.

OF THE SANCTITY OF THE MARRIAGE BED.

TJTHE marriage bed ought to be un defiled, as
<^s the Apostle says, Heb. xiii. 5 ; that is tc
say, exempt from uncleanness and all profane
tilthiness. Holy marriage was first instituted in
the earthly paradise, where, as yet, there nevei
had been any disorder of concupiscence, or of any-
thing immodest. There is some resemblance
between lustful pleasures and those that are taken
in eating, for both of them have relation to the
flesh, though the former, by reason of their brutal
vehemence, are called simply carnal. I will, then,
explain that which I cannot say of the one by that
which I shall say of the other.

1. Eating is ordained for our preservation : as,
then, eating, merely to nourish and preserve health,
is a good, holy, and necessary thing; so, that
which is requisite in marriage for bringing children
into the world and multiplying mankind is a good
thing and very holy, as it is the principal end of
marriage.

2. As to eat, not for the preservation of life,
but to keep up that mutual intercourse and con-
descension which we owe to each other, is a thing
in itself both lawful and just : so the mutual and


270 A DEVOUT LIFE.

lawful condescension of the parties united in holy
marriage is called by St. Paul a debt of so
obligatory a nature that he allows neither of the
parties exemption from it, without the voluntary
consent of the other, not even for the exercises of
devotion, as I have already observed in the chap-
ter on Holy Communion, p. 112. How much less,
then, may either party be dispensed from it through
a capricious pretence of virtue, or through anger
or disdain ?

3. As they that eat to maintain a mutual inter-
course of friendship with others ought to eat freely,
and endeavor to show an appetite to their meat ;
so the marriage debt should always be paid as
faithfully and freely as if it were in hopes of hav-
ing children, although on some occasion there
might be no such expectation.

4. To eat for neither of these reasons, but
merely to satisfy the appetite, may, indeed, be
tolerated, but cannot be commended ; for the mere
pleasure of the sensual appetite cannot be a suffi-
cient object to render an action commendable. To
eat not merely for the gratification of the appetite,
but also with excess and irregularity, is a thing
more or less blamable as the excess is more or less
considerable.

5. Now, excess in eating consists not only in
eating too much, but also in the time and manner
of eating. It is surprising, dear Philothea, that
honey, which is so proper and wholesome a food
for bees, may, nevertheless, become so hurtful to
them as sometimes to make them sick : for in
the spring, when they eat too much of it, being


SANCTITY OF THE MARRIAGE BED. 271

overcharged with it in the forepart of their head
and wings, they become sick, and frequently die.
In like manner, nuptial commerce, which is so
holy, just, and commendable in itself, and so
profitable to the commonwealth, is, nevertheless, in
certain cases dangerous to those that exercise it ;
for it frequently debilitates the soul with venial
sin, as in cases of mere and simple exces? ; and
sometimes it kills it effectually Iry mortal sin, fts
when the order appointed for the procreation ^x
children is violated and perverted ; in which case
according as one departs more or less from it, the
sins are more or less abominable, but always
mortal : for the procreation of children being the
principal end of marriage one may never lawfully
depart from the order which that end requires ;
though, on account of some accident or circum-
stance, it cannot at that time be brought about, as
it happens when barrenness, or pregnancy, pre-
vents generation. In these occurrences corporal
commerce may still be just and holy, provided the
rules of generation be followed : no accident what-
soever being able to prejudice the law which the
principal end of marriage has imposed. Certainly
the infamous and the execrable action of Onan in
his marriage was detestable in the sight of God,
as the holy text of the 38th chapter of Genesis
testifies : for although certain heretics of our days,
much more blamable than the Cynics, of whom St.
Jerome speaks in his commentary on the Epistle
to the Ephesians, have been pleased to say it was
the perverse intention only of that wicked man
which displeased God, the Scripture positively


272 A DEVOUT LIFE.

asserts the contrary, and assures us that the act
itself which he committed was detestable and
abominable in the sight of God.

It is a certain mark of a base and abject spirit
to think of eating before meal time, and, still more,
to amuse ourselves afterwards with the pleasure
which we took in eating, keeping it alive in our
words and imagination, and delighting in die rec-
ollection of the sensual satisfaction we had in
swallowing down those morsels ; as men do who
before dinner have their minds fixed on the spit,
and after dinner on the dishes ; men worthy to be
"scullions" of a kitchen, " who," as St. Paul says,
"make a god of their belly." Persons of honor
_iever think of eating but at sitting down at table,
and after dinner wash their hands and their mouth,
that they may neither retain the taste nor the
scent of wdiat they have been eating. The ele-
phant, although a gross beast, is yet the most
decent and most sensible of any other upon earth.
I will give you a specimen of his chastity : although
he never changes his female, and hath so tender a
love for her whom he hath chosen, yet he never
couples with her but at the end of every three
years, and then only for the space of five days,
but so privately that he is never seen in the act.
On the sixth day afterwards, when he makes his
appearance, the first thing he does is to go directly
to some river, where he washes his body entirely,
bein^ unwilling to return to the herd till be U
quite purified. May not these modest disposition*
in sucn an animal serve as lessons to married
people, not to keep their affections engaged in


SANCTITY OF THE MARRIAGE BED. Zi6

those sensual and carnal pleasures winch, accord-
ing to their vocation, they have exercised; but
when they are past to wash their heart and affec-
tion, and purify themselves from them as soon a?
possible, that afterwards, with freedom of mind,
they may practise other actions more pure and
elevated. In his advice consists the perfect prac-
tice of that excellent doctrine of St. Paul to the
Corinthians. "The time is short," said he; "it
remaineth that they wTho have wives be as though
they have none." For, according to St. Gregory,
that man has a wife as if he had none, who takes
corporal satisfaction with her in such a manner as
not to be diverted from spiritual exercises. NowT,
what is said of the husband is understood recipro-
csdly of the wife. " Let those that use the w^orld,"
says the same apostle, " be as though they used it
not." Let every one, then, use this world accord-
ing to his calling, but in such manner that, not
engaging his affection in it, he may be as free and
ready to serve God as if he used it not. " It is the
great evil of man," says St. Austin, " to desire to
enjoy the things which he should only use." We
should enjoy spiritual things, and only use corporal,
of winch when the use is turned into enjoyment,
our rational soul is also changed into a brutish and
beastly soul. I think I have said all that I w7ould
say to make myself understood, without saying
that wdiich I would not say.


274 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPT ER XL.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR WIDOWS.

^JAINT PAUL instructs all prelates in the person
&^ of Timothy, saying, " Honor widows that are
widows indeed." 1 Tim. v. 3. Now, to be a widow
indeed, the following conditions are required : —
1. That the widow be not only a widow in
body, but in heart, also ; that is, that she put on
an inviolable resolution to keep herself in the state
of a cIimsio widowhood ; for those that are widows
only till ».i opportunity presents itself of being
married again are only separate from men as to
the pleasures of the body, but are already joined
to them according to the will of the heart. But,
if she that is a widow indeed, in order to confirm
herself in the state of widowhood, will offer her
body and her chastity by vow to God, she will add
a great ornament to her widowhood, and give a
great security to her resolution. For since, after
her vow, she has it no longer in her power to quit
her chastity without quitting her title to heaven,
sue will be so jealous of her design that she will
not sutler so much as the least thought of marriage
to occupy her heart for a single moment ; so that
this sacred vow will serve as a strong barrier be-
tween her soul and every project contrary to her
resolution. St. Augustine advises this vow very
strenuously to the Christian widow ; and the ancient
and learned Origen goes much further, for he ex-


INSTRUCTIONS FOR WIDOWS. 275

horts married women to vow and dedicate them-
selves to a chaste widowhood, in case their husband
should die before them ; in order that, amidst the
sensual pleasures of marriage, they may also, by
means of this anticipated promise, enjoy the merit
of a chaste widowhood. A vow not only makes
the good works done in consequence of it more
acceptable to God, but also encourages us to put
them in execution ; it gives to God not only the
good works, which are the fruits of our good will,
but dedicates likewise to him the will itself, which
is the tree of all our actions. By simple chastity
we lend, as it were, our body to God, retaining
notwithstanding a liberty to subject it another day
to sensual pleasure ; but by the vow of chastity
we make him an absolute and irrevocable gift of
our body, without reserving to ourselves any power
Dl" recalling it, and thus happily render ourselves
slaves to him whose service is better than any
kingdom. Now, as I highly approve the advice of
these two great men , so I should wish that those souls
which are so happy as to desire to follow it should
do it prudently, piously, and solidly, having first
well examined their resolutions, invoked the light
and grace of heaven, and taken the counsel of some
wise and devout director • by this means all will
6e done with more fruit.

2. Moreover, this renunciation of a second mar-
riage must be made purely with the intention of
turning all the affections of the soul towards God,
and of uniting the heart entirely with that of his
divine Majesty ; for if the desire to leave her chil-
dren rich, or any other worldly pretension, should


276 A DEVOUT LIFE.

keep the widow in her state of widowhood, she
may perhaps have praise for it, but certainly not
before God ; for in the eyes of God nothing can
truly merit praise but that which is done for his
sake.

o. Moreover, the widow, that would be a widow
indeed, must voluntarily separate and restrain her-
self from profane satisfaction ; rr for she that liveth
in pleasures is dead while she is living," says St.
Paul, 1 Tim. v. 6. To desire to be a widow, and
to be, nevertheless, pleased with being courted,
flattered, and caressed ; to be fond of balls, danc-
ing, and feasting ; to be perfumed, finely dressed,
etc., is to be a widow, living as to the body, but
dead as to the soul. What doth it signify, I pray
you, whether the sign of the inn of Adonis, or oi
profane love, consist of white feathers, in the form
of a plume, or of black crape, spread like a net
around the face? Yea, the black is often put
over the white to make it look more conspicuous
and favorable to vanity ; for the widow having
made a trial of that fashion by which women can
please men best casts the most dangerous baits
before their minds. The widow, then, who lives in
these fond delights is dead while she lives, and
therefore, properly speaking, she is but an idol of
widowhood.

" The time of pruning is come ; the voice of the
turtle is heard in our land," says the canticle.
All that would live devoutly must prune and cut
away all worldly superfluities. But this is more
particularly necessary for the true widow, who, like
a chaste turtle, comes from weeping, bewailing,


INSTRUCTION ,> FOR WIDOWS. 277

and lamenting the loss of her husband. When
Noemi returned from Moab to Bethlehem, the
women of the town, who had known her when she
was first married, said one to another, rf Is not that
Noemi?" Ruth i. 20. But she answered, " Call
me not Noemi, I pray you, for Noemi signifies
comely and beautiful ; but call me Mara, for the
Lord has filled my soul with bitterness " ; this she
said because she had lost her husband. Thus the
devout widow never desires to be esteemed either
beautiful or comely, contenting herself with being
such as God desires her to be, that is to say, hum-
ble and abject in her own eyes.

Lamps in which aromatic oil is burnt emit 2
more sweet odor when their flame is extinguished ;
so widows whose love has been pure in their mar-
riage send forth a more sweet perfume of virtue
and chastity when their light, that is, their
husband, is extinguished by death. To love the
husband as long as he lives is an ordinary thing
amongst women ; but to love him so well that after
his death she will hear of no other is a degree of
love which appertains only to them that are
widows indeed. To hope in God whilst the
husband serves for a support is by no mean?
unusual ; but to hope in God when one is destitute
Ox this support is worthy of great praise. Hence
it is easy to know, in widowhood, the perfection
of the virtues which a woman possessed during
the life of her husband.

The widow who has children who stand in need
of her guidance and support, principally in their
spiritual concerns and their establishments in life,


278 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ought not by any means to abandon them ; for the
apostle St. Paul says clearly that they are obliged
to that care of their children to make the like
return to their parents. 1 Tim. iii. And that
they who have no solicitude for those that belong
to them, and especially for their own family, are
worse than infidels. But if the children be in such
a state as to stand in no need of her guidance, then
should the widow collect all her affections and
thoughts, to apply them more purely to her own
advancement in the love of God.

If some absolute necessity oblige not the con-
science of the true widow to external troubles,
such as suits in law, I counsel her to avoid them
altogether, and to follow that method in manag-
ing her affairs which appears the most peaceable
and quiet, although it may not seem the most
advantageous. For the advantages to be reaped
from worldly troubles must be very great to bear
any comparison with the happiness of a holy tran-
quillity. Moreover, disputes and lawsuits distract
the heart and often open a gate to the enemies of
chastity, because the parties, in order to please
those whose favor they stand in need of, do
not hesitate to render themselves displeasing to
God.

Let prayer be the widow's continual exercise ;
for as she ought now to love none but God, so
she ought to speak to scarcely any but God. For
as the iron, which, by the presence of the diamond,
is hindered from following the attraction of the
loadstone, springs towards it as soon as the
diamond is removed ; so the heart of the widow,


INSTRUCTIONS FOR WIDOWS. 279

*vhicli could not well give itself up so entirely to
God, nor follow the attractions of his divine love,
during the life of her husband, ought immediately
after his death to run ardently after the sweet
odor of the heavenly perfumes, as if she said, in
imitation of the heavenly Spouse : fr O Lord ! now
that I am all my own, receive me that I may he
all thine ; draw me ; we will run after thee to
the odor of thy ointments."

The virtues proper for the exercise of a holy
widow are perfect modesty, a renunciation of
honors, ranks, assemblies, titles, and of all such
varieties ; serving the poor and the sick, comfort-
ing the afflicted, instructing girls in a devout life,
and making themselves a perfect pattern of all
virtues to young women : cleanliness and simplic-
ity should be the ornaments of their dress ; humil-
ity and charity the ornaments of their actions ;
courtesy and mildness the ornaments of their
speech ; modesty and purity the ornaments of their
eyes ; and Jesus Christ crucified the only !< ve of
their heart. In fine, the true widow ,s ,n the
church a little violet of March, which sends forth
an incomparable sweetness by the odor of her
devotion, and almost always keeps herself con-
cealed under the broad leaves of her abjection,
since, by the obscurity of her attire, she testifies
her mortification. She grows in cool and unculti-
vated places, not willing to be importuned with
the conversation of worldlings, the better to pre-
serve the coolness of her heart against all the heats
which the desire of riches, of honors, or even of
fond love, might bring upon her. " She shall be


280 A DEVOUT LIFE.

blessed," says the holy apostle, " if she continue
in this manner." 1 Cor. vii. 8.

I could say much more upon this subject ; but
it will suffice to advise the widow who is solicitous
for the honor of her condition to read attentively
the excellent epistles which the great St. Jerome
wrote to Furia, Salvia, and all those other ladies
who were so happy as to be the spiritual children
of so great a father. Nothing can be added to his
instructions except this admonition : that the true
widow ought never to blame nor censure those
who pass to a second, or even a third or a fourth
marriage ; for in some cases God so disposes of
diem for his greater glory ; and that she must
always have before her eyes this doctrine of the
ancients, that neither widowhood nor virginity
aave any other place or rank in heaven but that
which is assigned to them by humility.


CHAPTER XLI.

A WORD TO VIRGINS

1P| VIRGINS ! I have only three words to say tc
^*> you, for the rest you will hud elsewhere. If
you pretend to a temporal marriage, be careful to
keep your first love for your first husband. In my
opinion it is a great deceit to present, instead of
an entire and sincere heart, a heart quite worn out,
spoiled and tired with love. But if you have the


A WORD TO VIRGINS. 281

happiness to be called to the pure and virginal
espousals of Christ, and you desire to preserve for-
ever your virginity, O God ! keep your love with
all possible diligence for this divine Spouse, who,
being purity itself, loves nothing so much as purity 4
and to whom are due the hrst fruits of all things,
but principally those of our love. St. Jerome's
epistles will furnish you with all advices necessary
ror you ; and, as your condition obliges you to
obedience, choose a guide under whose direction
you may dedicate, in a more holy manner, your
Ueart and body to his divine Majesty.


art jFourtlj*


CONTAINING NECESSARY ADVICES AGAINST THE MOST OR-
DINARY TEMPTATIONS.


CHAPTER T.

THAT WE MUST DISREGARD THE CENSURES OF WORLDLINGS.

|7pS soon as the children of this world perceive
™& that you desire to follow a devout life they
will discharge arrows of mockery and detraction1
against you without number. The most mali-
cious will attribute your change to hypocrisy,
bigotry, and artifice. They will say that, being
frowned upon and rejected by the world, you fly
for refuge to God. Your friends will make a
thousand remonstrances, which they imagine to
he very wise and charitable. They will tell you
that you will fall into some melancholy humor;
that you will lose your credit in the world, and
make yourself insupportable ; you will grow old
before your time ; your domestic affairs will
suffer ; you must live in the world like one in
the world ; salvation may be had wHhout so
many mysteries ; and a thousand similar imper-
tinencies.

Dear Philothea ! what is all this but foolish
and empty babbling? These people are not in-


REMEDIES AGAINST TEMPTATIONS. 283

teres ted in jour health or affairs. "If you had
been of the world," says our blessed Saviour, "the
world would love its own; but because you are
not of the world, therefore the world hateth you."
St. John xv. 19. We have seen gentlemen
and ladies pass the whole night, nay, many nights,
together at chess or cards ; and can there be any
attention more absurd, stupid, or gloomy, than
that of gamesters? And yet worldlings say not
a word, nor do friends ever trouble themselves
about them; but should they spend an hour in
meditation, or rise in the morning a little earlier
than ordinary to prepare themselves for com-
munion, every one would run to the physician
to cure them of hypochondriacal humors and
vapors. These persons can pass thirty nights
in dancing without experiencing any inconven-
ience ; but for watching only one Christmas
night every one coughs, and complains that he
is sick the next morning. Who sees not that
the world is an unjust judge, gracious and favor-
able to its own children, but harsh and rigorous
towards the children of God?

We can never please the world unless we lose
ourselves together with the world; it is so whim-
sical that it is impossible to satisfy it. "John
came neither eating nor drinking," says our Sav-
iour, "and you say he hath a devil. The Son of
Man is come eating and drinking, and you say :
Behold a man that is a glutton, and a drinker of
wine." St. Luke vii. 33. It is true, Phil-
othea, that if, through condescension, we consent
to laugh, play, or dance with the world, the


284 A DEVOUT LIFE.

world will be scandalized at us ; and if we do not
it will accuse us of hypocrisy or melancholy. If
we dress gayly, the world will say that we do so
for some evil end ; if Ave neglect our dress, it will
impute it either to meanness or avarice. Our
mirth will be termed dissoluteness, and our mor-
tification sullenness ; and as the world thus looks
upon us with an evil eye, we can never be agree-
able to it. It aggravates our imperfections, pub-
lishing them as sins ; it makes our venial sins
mortal, and our frailties sins of malice. Charity
is benevolent and kind, sa}rs St. Paul, but the
world is malicious ; charity thinks no evil,
whereas, the world, on the contrary, always
thinks evil, and when it cannot condemn our
actions it will accuse our intentions. So that
whether the sheep have horns or not, whether
they be white or black, the wolf will not hesitate
to devour them, if he can.

Whatever we do, the world will wage war
against us. If we remain long at confession,
it will wonder how we can have so much to say ;
if we stay but a short time, it will say, we
have not confessed all our sins. It will observe
all our motions, and for one word of anger that
we utter it will protest that our temper is in-
supportable ; the care of our affairs will be called
covetousness, and our meekness, folly. But as
for the children of the world, their anger is called
generosity ; their avarice, economy ; their famil-
iarities, honorable entertainments : spiders always
2poil the work of the bees.

Let us turn a deaf ear to this blind world.


REMEDIES AGAIXST TEMPTATIONS. 285

Philothea ; let it cry as long as it pleases, like an
owl, to disturb the birds of the day. Let us be>
constant in our designs, and invariable in our
resolutions. Our perseverance will demonstrate
whether we have, in good earnest, sacrificed our-
selves to God and dedicated ourselves to a devout
life. Comets and planets appear to be almost of
an equal light ; but as comets are only certain
fiery exhalations which pass away, and after a short
time disappear, whereas planets remain in perpet-
ual brightness ; so hypocrisy and true virtue have
a great resemblance in their external appearance,
but they are easily distinguished from each other ;
because hypocrisy cannot long subsist, but is
quickly dissipated like smoke, whereas true virtue
is always firm and constant.

It contributes highly to the security of devotion,
at the beginning, to sutler reproaches and calumny
on its account, since we thus avoid the dangers of
pride and vanity, which may be compared to the
mid wives of Egypt, who had been ordered by the
cruel Pharaoh to kill the male children of the
Israelites on the very day of their birth. As we
are crucified to the world, the world ought to be
crucified to us ; since worldlings look upon us as
foolish, let us regard them in the same light.


286 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER II.

THAT WF MUST ALWAYS HAVE GOOD COURAGE.

PLIGHT, though it be beautiful and lovely to
** our eyes, nevertheless dazzles them after we
have been long in the dark. Before we become
familiar with the inhabitants of any country, no
matter how courteous and gracious they may be,
we find ourselves at a loss amongst them. It may
probably happen, Philothea, that this general
farewell, which you have bid to the follies and
vanities of the world, may make some impressions
of sadness and discouragement on your mind. If
this should be the case, have a little patience, I
pray, for these impressions will soon disappear.
It is but a little strangeness, occasioned by
novelty ; when it shall have passed away you will
feel ten thousand consolations.

It may perhaps be painful to you at first to
renounce that praise which your vanities extorted
from foolish worldlings ; but would you. for the
sake of this insignificant reward, forfeit that eternal
glory writh which God will assuredly recompense
you? The vain amusements, in which you have
hitherto employed your time, will again represent
themselves to allure your heart, and invite it to
return to them ; but can you resolve to renounce
eternal happiness for such deceitful fooleries?
Believe me, if you persevere, you will quickly
receive consolations, so delicious and agreeable


COURAGE NECESSARY TO TEMPTATIONS. 287

that they will force you to acknowledge that the
world has nothing but gall in comparison of this
honey, and that one clay of devotion is preferable
to a thousand years expended in all the pleasures
that the world can afford.

But you see the mountain of Christian perfection
is exceedingly high. O my God ! you say, how
shall I be able to ascend? Courage, Philothea !
When the young bees begin to assume their form
we call them nymphs ; as yet they are unable to
fly to the flowers, the mountains, or the neighbor-
ing hills, to gather honey ; but, by continuing to
^eed on the honey which the old ones have pre-
pared, their wings appear, and they acquire suffi-
cient strength to fly and seek their food all over
the country. It is true we are as yet but nymphs,
or little bees, in devotion, and consequently unable
to fly so high as to reach the top of Christian per-
fection ; but yet, as our desires and resolutions
begin to assume a form, and our wings begin to
grow, we may reasonably hope that we shall one
day become spiritual bees, and be able to fly ; in
the meantime let us feed upon the honey of
the many good instructions which other devout
persons have left us, and pray to God to give us
wings like a dove, that we may not only be
enabled to fly up, during the time of this present
life, but also rest on the mountain of eternity in
the life to come.


268 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER III.

OF THE NATURE OF TEMPTATIONS, AND OF THE DlFFERENC*
BETWEEN FEELING TEMPTATION AND CONSENTING TO IT.

IMAGINE to yourself, Philothea, a young prin-
« cess, extremely beloved by her spouse, and that
some wicked man, in order to derile her marriage
bed, sends an infamous messenger to treat with
her concerning his abominable design. First, the
messenger proposes the intention of his master ;
secondly, the princess is pleased or displeased with
the proposition ; thirdly, she either consents or
refuses. In the same manner, Satan, the world,
and the flesh, seeing a soul espoused to the Son of
God, send her temptations and suggestions, by
which, 1. Sin is proposed to her; 2. She is
either pleased or displeased with the proposal ; 3.
In tine, she either consents or refuses. Such are
the three steps to ascend to iniquity : temptation,
delectation, and consent. But though these three
actions are not so manifest in all kinds of sins, yet
are they palpably seen in those that are enormous.
Though the temptation to any sin whatsoever
should last during life it could never render us
disagreeable to the divine Majesty, provided that
we were not pleased with it, and did not give our
consent to it ; the reason is, because we do not act,
but suffer in temptation ; and as in this we take
no pleasure, so we cannot incur any guilt. St.
Paul suffered a long time the temptations of the


NATURE OF TEMPTATIONS. '26$

flesh, and yet was so far from being displeasing to
God on that account, that, on the contrary, God
was glorified by his patient suffering. The
blessed Angela de Fulgina suffered such cruel
temptations of the flesh that she moves to com-
passion when she relates them. St. Francis and
St. Bennet also suffered such violent temptations
that, in order to overcome them, the one was
obliged to cast himself naked on thorns, and the
other into snow ; yet they lost nothing of God's
favor, but increased very much in grace.

You must, then, be courageous, Philothea,
amidst temptations, and never think yourself over-
come as long as they displease you, observing
well this difference between feeling and consent-
ing, viz., we may feel temptations, though they
displease us ; but we can never consent to them
unless they please us, since to be pleased with
them ordinarily serves as a step towards our con-
sent. Let, then, the enemies of our salvation lay
as many baits and allurements in our way as they
please, let them stay always at the door of our
heart in order to gain admittance, let them make
as many proposals as they can ; still, as long as we
remain steadfast in our resolution to take no pleas-
ure in the temptation, it is utterly i/nposvOble that
we should offend God, any more than the prince
of whom I spoke could be displeased with his
spouse for the infamous message sent to her, if she
took no pleasure whatever in it. Yet, in this case,
there is this difference between her and the soul,
that the princess, having heard of the wicked prop-
osition, may, if she please, drive away the mes-


290 A DEVOUT LIFE.

senger, and never suffer him to appear again IB
her presence ; but it is not always in the power
of the soul not to feel the temptation, though it be
always in her power not to consent to it ; and,
therefore, no matter how long the temptation may
last, it cannot hurt us as long as it is disagreeable
to us.

But, with respect to the delectation which may
follow the temptation, it must be observed that,
as there are two parts in the soul, the inferior and
the superior, and that the inferior does not always
follow the superior, but acts for itself apart, it
frequently happens that the inferior part takes
delight in the temptation without the consent, nay,
against the will of the superior. That is that war
fare which the Apostle describes, Gal. v. 17, when
he sa}rs that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
that there is a law of the members and a law of the
spirit.

Have you never seen, Philothea, a large fire-
covered with ashes? Should one come ten or
twelve hours after, in search of fire, he would find
but little in the midst of the hearth, and even that
would be found with difficulty ; yet there it is,
•^ince there it is found, and with it he may kindle
again the remainder of the coals that were dead.
It is just so with charity, our spiritual life, in the
midst of violent temptations ; for the temptation,
casting the delectation which accompanies it into
the inferior part, covers the whole soul, as it were,
with ashes, and reduces the love of God into a
narrow compass ; for it appears nowhere but in the
midst of the heart, in the interior of the soul ; and


EXAMPLES OF TEMPTATIONS. 291

even there it scarcely seems perceptible, and with
much difficulty we mid it ; yet there it is in reality,
since, notwithstanding all the trouble and disorder
we feel in our soul and our body, we still retain a
resolution never to consent to the temptation ; and
the delectation, which pleases the outward man,
displeases the inward, so that, although it sur-
rounds the will, yet it is not within it ; by which
we see that such delectation, being contrary to the
wilh can be no sin.


•*o>*;o<


CHAPTER IV.

TWO GOOD EXAMPLES ON THIS SUBJECT.

SK|S it is so important that you should understand
^^ this matter perfectly, I will explain it more at
large. A young man, as St. Jerome relates, being
fastened down with bands of silk on a delicate,
soft bed, was enticed by all sorts of filthy allure-
ments by a lascivious woman, who was employed
by the persecutors on purpose to stagger his con-
stancy. Ah, must not his chaste soul have felt
strange disorders ? Must not his senses have been
seized with delectation, and his imagination occu-
pied by the presence of those voluptuous objects?
Undoubtedly ; yet among so many conflicts, in the
midst of so terrible a storm of temptations, and
the many lustful pleasures that surrounded him, he
sufficiently testified that his heart was not van-


292 A DEVOUT LIFE.

quished, and that his will gave no consent. Per-
ceiving so general a rebellion against his will, and
having now no part of his body at command
but his tongue, he bit it off and spit it in the face
of that filthy woman, who tormented his soul more
cruelly by her lust than all the executioners could
ever have done by the greatest torments ; for the
tyrant, despairing to conquer him by suffering,
thought to overcome him by these pleasures.

The history of the conflict of St. Catharine of
Sienna, on the like occasion, is very admirable.
The wicked spirit had permission from God to as-
sault the purity of this holy virgin with the great-
est fury, yet so as not to be allowed to touch her.
He presented, then, all kinds of impure suggestions
to her heart; and, to move her the more, coming
with his companions in form of men and women, he
committed a tl? Dusand acts immodest in her presence
adding most filthy words and invitations ; and, al-
though all these things were exterior, nevertheless,
by means of the senses, they penetrated deep into
the heart of the virgin, which, as she herself con-
fessed, was even brimful of them ; so that nothing
remained in her except the pure, superior will,
which was not shaken with this tempest of filthy
carnal delectation. This temptation continued for
a longtime, till one day our Saviour, appearing to
her, she said to him : " Where wertthou, my sweet
Saviour, when my heart was full of so great dark-
ness and uncleanness ? " To which he answered : "I
was within thy heart, my daughter." — "But how,"
replied she, " could you dwell in my heart, where
there was so much impurity? Is it possible that


EXAMPLES OF TEMPTATIONS. 293

thou couldst dwell in so unclean a place ? " To
which our Lord replied : " Tell me, did these filthy
thoughts of thy heart give thee pleasure or sad-
ness, bitterness or delight?" — "The most extreme
bitterness and sadness," said she. " Who was it,
then," replied our Saviour, "that caused this great
bitterness and sadness in thy heart but I, who re-
mained concealed in the interior of thy soul ? Be-
lieve me, daughter, had it not been for my pres-
ence these thoughts which surrounded thy will
would have doubtless entered in, and with pleas-
ure would have brought death to thy soul ; but,
being present, I infused this displeasu* 3 into thy
heart, which enabled thee to reject the temptation
as much as it could ; but, not being able to do it as
much as it desired, it conceived a greater displeas-
ure and hatred both against the temptation and thy-
self; and thus these troubles have proved occa-
sions of great merit to thee, and have served to
increase thy strength and virtue."

Behold, Philothea, how this lire was covered
with ashes, and how the temptation had even
entered the heart, and surrounded the will which,
assisted by our Saviour, held out to the last,
making resistance by her aversion, displeasure,
and detestation of the evil suggested, and con-
stantly refusing her consent to the sin which be-
sieged her on every side. Good God ! how
distressing must it be to a soul that loves God not
to know whether he be within her or not, or
whether the divine love, for which she fights, be
altogether extinguished in her or not ! But it is
the perfection of heavenly love to make the lover


294 A DEVOUT LIFE.

suffer and fight for love, not knowing whethei he
possesses that love for which, and by which, he
fights.


CHAPTER V.

AN ENCOURAGEMENT TO A SOUL IN TEMPTATION.

^flffiESE violent assaults and extraordinary
^^ temptations, Philothea are permitted bv
God against those souls only whom he desire?
to elevate to the highest degree of divine love,
yet it does not follow that they shall afterwards
attain it ; for it has often happened that those
who have been constant under these assaults
have, for want of faithfully corresponding with
the divine favor, been afterwards overcome by
very small temptations. This I tell you, that, if
you should happen hereafter to be assaulted by
great temptations, you may know that God con-
fers an extraordinary favor on you when he
thus declares his will to make you great in his
sight ; and that, nevertheless, you must be always
humble and fearful, not assuring yourself that
you shall be able to overcome small temptations,
after you have prevailed against great ones, by
any other means than a constant fidelity to his
divine Majesty.

Whatever temptations, then, may hereafter be-
fall you, or with whatever delectation they may
be accompanied, so long as your will refuses hei


ENCOURAGEMENT iN TEMPTATION. 295

consent, not only to the temptation, but also to
the delectation, give not yourself the least
trouble, for God is not offended. As, when a
man is so far £one in a lit as to show no sum of
life, they lay their hand on his heart, and from
the least palpitation they feel conclude that he
is alive, and that by the application of some re-
storative he may again recover his strength and
senses ; so it sometimes happens that, through
the violence of a temptation, our soul seems to
have fallen into a lit, so as to have no longer any
spiritual life or motion ; but, if Ave desire to know
how it is with her, let us lay our hand upon our
heart, and consider whether our will still retains
its spiritual motion, that is to say, whether it has
done its duty in refusing to consent and to yield
to the temptation and delectation ; for, so long as
this motion of refusal remains, we may rest as-
sured that charity, the life of our soul, remains in
us, and that Jesus Christ, our Saviour, although
concealed, is there present ; so that by means of
the continued exercise of prayer, the sacraments,
and a confidence in God, we shall again return tc
a strong, sound, and healthful spiritual life.


296 A DEVOUT LITE.


CHAPTER VI.

HOW TEMPTATION AND DELECTATION MAY BECOME SINFUL

THE princess, of whom we spoke before, could
^ not prevent the dishonorable proposal which
was made to her, because, as was presupposed, it
was made against her will ; but had she, on the
contrary, given it the least encouragement, or
betrayed a willingness to give her affection to
him that courted her, doubtless she would then
have been guilty in the sight of God, and, how-
ever she might dissemble it, would certainly de-
serve both blame and punishment. Thus it
sometimes happens that the temptation alone
involves us in sin, because we ourselves are the
cause of it. For example, I know that when I
play, I fall easilv into violent passions and blas-
phemy, and that gaming serves me as a tempta-
tion to those sins ; I sin, therefore, as often as I
play, and I am accountable for all the temptations
which shall befall me. In like manner, if I know
that certain conversations will expose me to the
danger of falling into sin, and yet willingly ex-
pose myself to them, I am doubtless guilty of
all the temptations I may meet with on such
occasions.

When the delectation which proceeds from the
temptation can be avoided, it is always a greater
or less sin to admit it, in proportion as the
pleasure we take, or the consent we give to


TEMPTATION WHEN SINFUL. 297

it, is of a longer or shorter duration. The young
princess before alluded to would be highly b lam-
able, if, after having heard the filthy proposal,
she should take pleasure in it, and entertain her
heart with satisfaction on so improper a subject :
for, although she does not consent to the real exe-
cution of what is proposed to her, she consents,
nevertheless, to the spiritual application of her
heart to the evil, by the pleasure she takes
in it, because it is always criminal to apply
either the heart or the body to anything that is
immodest ; but the sin depends so much on the
consent of the heart, that without it even the ap-
plication of the body could not be a sin.

Wherefore, whenever you are tempted to any
sin, consider whether you have not voluntarily
given occasion to the temptation ; for then the
temptation itself puts you in a state of sin, on
account of the "danger to which you have exposed
yourself; this is to be understood when you co^ld
conveniently have avoided the occasion, and fore-
saw, or ought to have foreseen, the approach of
the temptation ; but, if you have given no occasion
to the temptation, it cannot by any means be im-
puted to you as a sin.

When the delectation which follows tempta-
tion might have been avoided, and yet has not,
there is always some kind of sin, more or less
considerable, according to the time you have dwelt
upon it, or the pleasure you have taken in it. A
woman who has given no occasion to her being
courted, and yet takes pleasure therein, is, never-
theless, to be blamed, if the pleasure which she


!98 A DEVOUT LIFE.


takes originate in no other cause than the court
ship. But, for example, if the gallant who sues foi
love should play excellently well upon the lute,
and she should take pleasure, not in his courtship,
but in the harmony and sweetness of his lute, this
would be no sin ; though she ought not to indulge
this pleasure long, for fear that she should pass
thence to a desire of being courted. In like
manner, if any one should propose to me some
ingenious stratagem, to take revenge of my enemy,
and I should neither delight in, nor consent to, the
proposed revenge, but only be pleased with the
subtility of the artful invention ; although it would
be no sin, still I ought not to continue long amus-
ing myself with this pleasure, for fear that by
degrees I might be induced to take some delight
in the revenge itself.

We are sometimes surprised by certain symp-
toms of pleasure, which immediately follow the
temptation, before we are well aware of it. This
at most can only be a light venial sin ; but it be-
comes greater, if, after we have perceived the evil
which has befallen us, we stop some time, through
negligence, to determine whether we shall admit
or reject that delectation ; and the sin becomes
still greater, if, after being sensible of the delec-
tation, we dwell upon it, through downright
negligence, without being determined to reject it ;
but when we voluntarily, and with full delibera-
tion, resolve to consent to this delectation, this of
itself is a great sin, if the object in which we take
delight be also a great sin. It is a great crime
oi a woman to be willing to entertain dishonest


REMEDIES AGAINST TEMPTATION. 29i*»

love, although she never designs to yield hersett
up really to her lovers.


CHAPTER VII.

REMEDIES AGAINST GREAT TEMPTATIONS.

§K|S soon as you perceive yourself tempted,
^^ follow the example of children when they see
a wolf or a bear in the country ; for they immedi-
ately run into the arms of their father or mother,
or at least they call out to them for help or as-
sistance. It is the remedy which our Lord has
taught : "Pray that ye enter not into temptation."
St. Matt. xxvi. 41. If you find that the tempta-
tion, nevertheless, still continues, or even in-
creases, run in spirit to embrace the holy cross,
is if you saw our Saviour Jesus Christ crucified
before you. Protest that you never will consent
to the temptation, implore his assistance against
it, and still refuse your consent as long as the
temptation shall continue.

But, in making these protestations and refusals
ot consent, look not the temptation in the face,
but look only on our Lord ; for if you look at the
temptation, especially while it is strong, it may
shake your courage. Divert }'our thoughts to
some good and pious reflections, for, when good
thoughts occupy your heart, they will drive away
every temptation and suggestion.


300 A PE


■V 7-ATTT T TT7TC


But the sovereign remedy against all tempta
tions, whether great or small, is to lay open your
heart, and communicate its suggestions, feelings,
and affections to your director ; for you must
observe, that the first condition that the enemy of
salvation makes with a soul which he desires to
seduce is to keep silence ; as those who intend to
seduce maids, or married women, at the very first
forbid them to communicate their proposals to
their parents or husbands ; whereas God, on the
other hand, by his inspirations, requires that we
should make them known to our superiors and
directors.

If, after all this, the temptation should still
continue to harass and persecute us, we have
nothing to do on our part but to continue as
resolute in our protestations never to consent to
it ; for as maids can never be married as long as
they answer no, so the soul, no matter how long
the temptation may last, can never sin as long as
she says no.

Never dispute with your enemy, nor make him
any reply but that with which our Saviour con-
founded him : " Begone, Satan, for it is written
the Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only
shalt thou serve." For as a chaste wife should
never answer the wicked wretch that makes her
a dishonorable proposal, but quit him abruptly,
and at the same instant turn her heart towards her
husband, and renew the promise of fidelity which
she has made to him; so the devout soul, that
sees herself assaulted by temptation, ought by no
means to lose time in disputing, but with ail sim-


HOW TO RESIST SMALL TEMPTATIONS. 301

plicity turn herself towards Jesus Christ her
Spouse, and renew her protestation of fidelity to
him, and her resolution to remain solely and en-
tirely his forever.


>XXc


CHAPTER VIII.

THAT WE MUST RESIST SMALL TEMPTATIONS.

IJR^LTHOUGH we must oppose great tempta-
affk tions with an invincible courage, and the
victory we gain over them is extremely advan-
tageous, it may happen, nevertheless, that we
may profit more in resisting small ones, for as
great temptations exceed in quality, so small
ones exceed in quantity ; wherefore the victory
over them may be comparable to that which is
gained over the greatest. Wolves and bears are
certainly more dangerous than rlies ; yet the for-
mer neither give us so much trouble, nor exercise
our patience so much, as the latter. It is easy to
abstain from murder, but it is extremely difficult
to restrain all the little sallies of passion, the
occasions of which present themselves every mo-
ment. It is very easy for a man or a woman to
refrain from adultery, but it is not as easy to
refrain from glances of the eyes, from giving or
receiving marks of love, or from uttering or lis-
tening to flattery. It is easy not to admit a rival
with the husband or wife, as to the body, but
viot as to the heart ; it is easy to refrain froiv


302 A DEVOUT LIFE.

defiling the marriage bed, but it is difficult to
retrain from everything that may be prejudicial
to conjugal affection ; it is easy not to steal other
men's goods, but difficult not to covet them ; it
is easy not to bear false witness in judgment,
but difficult to observe truth strictly on every
occasion ; it is easy to refrain from drunkenness,
but difficult to observe perfect sobriety ; it is easy
to refrain from wishing another man's death, but
difficult to refrain from desiring what may be
inconvenient to him ; it is easy to abstain from
defaming him, but it is sometimes difficult to re-
frain from despising him. In a word, these small
temptations of anger, suspicion, jealousy, envy,
fond love, levity, vanity, insincerity, affectation,
craftiness, and impure thoughts, are continually
assaulting even those who are the most devoui
and resolute. We must, therefore, diligently
prepare ourselves, my dear Philothea, for this
warfare ; and rest assured, that for as many vic-
tories as Ave shall gain over these trifling ene-
mies, so many gems shall be added to the crown
of glory which God is preparing for us in heaven.
Wherefore I say, that being ever ready to fight
courageously against great temptations, we must
in the meantime diligently defend ourselves against
those that seem small and inconsiderable .


HOW TO RESIST SMALL TEMPTATIONS. 303

CHAPTER IX.

WHAT REMEDIES WE ARE TO APPLY TO SMALL TEMPTATIONS.

SR^OW as to these smaller temptations of vanity,
^^ suspicion, impatience, jealousy, envy, fond
love, and such like trash, which, like flies and
gnats, continually hover about us, and some-
times sting us on the legs, the hands, or the
face; as it is impossible to be altogether freed
from them, the best defence that we can make is
not to give ourselves much trouble about them ;
for although they may tease us, yet they can never
hurt us, so long as we continue firmly resolved to
dedicate ourselves in earnest to the service of God.
Despise, then, these petty assaults, without so
much as thinking of what they suggest. Let
them buzz and hover here and there around
you ; pay no more attention to them than you
would to flies ; but when they offer to sting you,
and you perceive them in the least to light upon
your heart, content yourself with quietly remov-
ing them, not by contending or disputing with
them, but by performing some actions of a con-
trary nature to the temptation, especially acts
of the love of God. But you must not persevere,
Philothea, in opposing to the temptation the
act of the contrary virtue, for this would be to
dispute with it ; but, after having performed a
simple act of the contrary virtue, if you have
had leisure to observe the quality of the tempta-


304 A DEVOUT LIFE.

tion, turn your heart gently towards Jesus Christ
crucified, and by an act of love kiss his sacred
feet. This is the best means to overcome the
enemy, as well in small as in great temptations ;
for as the love of God contains within itself tho
perfection of all the virtues, and is even more ex-
cellent than the virtues themselves, so it is also
the sovereign antidote against every kind of vice ;
and, by accustoming your mind on these occasions
to have recourse to this remedy, you need not
even examine by what kind of temptation it is
troubled. Moreover, this grand remedy is so
terrible to the enemy of onr souls, that as soon as
he perceives that his temptation incites us to form
acts of divine love he ceases to tempt us. Let
these general principles suffice with respect to
small and ordinary temptations ; he who would
wish to contend with them in particular would
give himself much trouble to little or no purpose.


CHAPTER X.

HOW TO FORTIFY OUR HEARTS AGAINST TEMPTATIONS.

1f|50NSIDER from time to time what passions are
^^ most predominant in your soul ; and, having
discovered them, adopt such a method of think-
ing, speaking, and acting, as may contradict them.
If, for example, you find yourself inclined to
vanity, think often on the miseries of human


FORTITUDE IN TEMPTATIONS. 305

life ; think of the inquietude which these vani-
ties will raise in your conscience at the day of
your death ; how unworthy they are of a gener-
ous heart, and that they are nothing but empty
toys, fit only for the amusement of children.
Speak often against vanity, and, whatever re-
pugnance you may feel, cease not to cry it down,
for by this means you will engage yourself, even
in honor, to the opposite side ; for by declaim-
ing against a tiling we bring ourselves to hate
it, though at first we might have had an aftec-
Hon for it. Exercise works of abjection and hu-
mility as much as possible, though with ever so
great a reluctance ; since by this means you ac-
custom yourself to humility, and weaken your
vanity ; so that, when the temptation comes, you
will have less inclination to consent to it, and
more strength to resist it.

If you are inclined to covetousness, think fre-
quently on the folly of a sin which makes us
slaves to that which was only made to serve us,
and that at death we must part with all, and leave
it in the hands of those who perhaps may squander
it away, or to whom it may be a cause of damna-
tion. Speak loud against avarice, and in praise
of an utter contempt of the world. Force your-
self to give frequent alms, and neglect to improve
some opportunities of gain. Should you be in-
clined to give or receive fond love, often think
how very dangerous this kind of amusement is, as
well to yourself as others ; how unworthy a thing
it is, to employ in an idle pastime the noblest
affection of our soul, and how worthy of censure


<306 A DEVOUT LITE.

is so extreme a levity of mind. Speak often in
praise of purity and simplicity of heart, and let
your actions, to the utmost of your power, be ever
conformable to your words, by avoiding levities
and fond liberties. In short, in time of peace,
that is, when temptations to the sin to which you
are most inclined do not molest you, make several
acts of the contrary virtue ; and, if occasions of
practising it do not present themselves, endeavor
to seek them ; for by this means you will
strengthen your heart against future tempta-
tions.


CHAPTER XI.

OF INQUIETUDE.

UJ|S inquietude is not only a temptation, but
™fc the source of many temptations, it is there-
fore necessary that I should say something con-
cerning it. Inquietude, or sadness, then, is nothing
else but that grief of mind which we conceive for
some evil which we experience against our will,
whether it be exterior, as poverty, sickness, con-
tempt; or interior, as ignorance, avidity, repugn
nance, and temptation. "When the soul, then,
perceives that some evil has befallen her, she
becomes sad, is displeased, and extremely anxious
to rid herself of it : and thus far she is right, for
every one naturally desires to embrace good, and
fly from that which he apprehends to be evil. If


OF INQUIETUDE. 307

the soul, for the love of God, wishes to be freed
from her evil, she will seek the means of her
deliverance with patience, meekness, humility, and
tranquillity, expecting it more from the providence
of God than from her own industry or diligence.
But if she seeks her deliverance, from a motive of
self-love, then will she fatigue herself in quest of
these means, as if the success depended more on
herself than on God : I do not say that she thinks
so, but that she acts as if she thought so. Now,
if she succeeds not immediately according to her
wishes, she falls into inquietude, which, instead
of removing, aggravates the evil, and involves her
in such anguish and distress, with so great loss of
courage and strength, that she imagines her evil
incurable. Thus, then, sadness, which in the
beginning is just, produces inquietude, and inquie-
tude produces an increase of sadness, which is
extremely dangerous.

Inquietude is the greatest evil that can befall
the soul, sin only excepted. For, as the seditious
and intestine commotions of any commonwealth
prevent it from being able to resist a foreign in-
vasion, so our heart, being troubled within itself,
loses the strength necessary to maintain the virtue
it had acquired, and the means to resist the temp-
tations of the enemy, who then uses his utmost
efforts to fish, as it is said, in troubled waters.

Inquietude proceeds from an inordinate desire
of being delivered from the evil which we feel, 01
of acquiring the good which we desire : and yet
there is nothing which tends more to increase evil,
and to prevent the enjoyment of good, than an un-


308 A DEVOUT LIFE.

quiet mind. Birds remain prisoners in the nets,
because, when they find themselves caught, they
eagerly flutter about to extricate themselves, and
by that means entangle themselves the more.
Whenever:, then, you are pressed with a desire to
<&e freed from some evil, or to obtain some good,
be care frit both to settle your mind in repose and
tranquillity, and to compose your judgment and
will ; and 'then gently procure the accomplishment
of your desire, taking in regular order the means
which may be most convenient ; when I say gently,
I do not mean negligently, but without hurry,
trouble, or inquietude ; otherwise, instead of ob-
taining the effect of your desire, you will mar all,
and embarrass yourself the more.

" My soul is continually in my hands, O Lord,
and I have not forgotten thy law," said David. Ps.
cxviii. 109. Examine frequently in the day, or
at least in the morning and evening, whether you
have your soul in your hands, or whether some
passion or inquietude has not robbed you of it.
Consider whether you have your heart at com-
mand, or whether it has not escaped out of your
hands, to engage itself to some disorderly atfec-
tion of love, hatred, envy, covetousness, fear, un-
easiness, or joy. If it should be gone astray, seek
after it before you do anything else, and bring it
back quietly to the presence of God, subjecting
all your affections and desires to the obedience
and directions of his divine will. For as the}'
who are afraid of losing anything which is precious
hold it fast in their hands ; so, in imitation of this
srreat king, we should always say, " O my God ! my


OF INQUIETUDE. 309

3011I is in danger, and therefore I carry it always
in my hands ; and in this manner I have not for-
gotten thy holy law."

Permit not your desires, how trivial soever they
may be, to disquiet you, lest afterwards those that
are of greater importance should find your heart
involved in trouble and disorder. When you
perceive that inquietude begins to affect your mind
recommend yourself to God. and resolve to do
nothing until it is restored to tranquillity, unless
it should be something that cannot be deferred ; in
that case, moderating the current of your desires
as much as possible, perform the action, not
according to your desire but your reason.

If you can disclose the cause of your disquietude
to your spiritual director, or at least to some
faithful and devout friend, be assured that you
will presently find ease ; for communicating the
grief of the heart produces the same effect on the
soul as bleeding does in the body of him that is in
a continual fever ; it is the remedy of remedies,
xlccordinolv the holy k'ms: St. Lewis o^ave this
counsel to his son: "If thou hast any uneasiness
in thy heart, tell it immediately to thy confessor,
or to some good person, and then thou shalt be
enabled to bear thy evil very easily, by the com-
fort he will give thee."


310 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER XII

OF SADNESS.

YJTHE sadness that is according to God," says St.
<Mp Paul, "worketh penance steadfast unto salva-
tion," 2 Cor. vii. ; "but the sadness of the world
worketh death." Sadness, then, may be good or
evil, according to its different effects. It is true it
produces more evil effects than good, for it has only
two that are good, compassion and repentance ; but
it haa six that are evil, viz., anxiety, sloth,
indignation, jealousy, envy, and impatience, which
caused the wise man to say, "sadness kills many,
and there is no profit in it," Ecclus. xxx. 25:
because, for two good streams which flow from
the source of sadness, there are six very evil.

The enemy makes use of sadness and temptation
against the just ; for, as he endeavors to make the
wicked to rejoice in their sins, so he strives to
make the good grieve in their good works ; and as
he cannot procure the commission of evils but by
making it appear agreeable, so he cannot divert us
from good but by making it appear disagreeable.
The prince of darkness is pleased with sadness and
melancholy, because he is and will be sad and
melancholy to all eternity ; therefore he desires
that every one should be like himself.

The sadness which is evil troubles and per-
plexes the soul, excites inordinate fears, creates a
disgust for prayer, stupefies and oppresses the brain,


OF SADNESS. 311

deprives the mind of counsel, resolution, judgment,
and courage, and destroys her strength. In a
word, it is like a severe winter, which demolishes
all the beauty of the country, and devours every
living creature ; for it takes away all sweetness from
the soul, and renders her disabled in all her
faculties. If you should at any time be seized
with the evil of sadness, Philothea, apply the
following remedies.

"Is any one sad," says St. James v. 13, "let
him pray." Prayer is a sovereign remedy, for it
lifts up the soul to God, our only joy and conso-
lation. But, in praying, let your words and
affections, whether interior or exterior, always
tend to a liyely confidence in the divine goodness,
such as, "O God of mercy ! O infinite goodness ! O
my sweet Saviour ! O God of my heart, my joy and
my hope ! O my divine* Spouse, the well-beloved
of my soul ! " etc-

Oppose vigorously the least inclination to sad-
ness, and, although it may seem that all your
actions are at that time performed with tepidity
and sloth, you must, nevertheless, persevere ; for
the enemy, who seeks by sadness to make us weary
of good works, seeing that we cease not on that
account to perform them, andthst, being performed
in spite of his opposition, they become more
meritorious, will cease to trouble us any longer.

Sing spiritual canticles, for the devil by this
means has often desisted from his operations :
witness the evil spirit with which Saul was afflicted,
whose violence was repressed by such music. It
is also necessarily serviceable to emplov ourselves


J 12 A DEVOUT LIFE.

in exterior works, and to vary them as much as
possible, in order to divert the soul from the
melancholy object, and to purify and warm the
spirits, sadness being a passion of a cold and dry
complexion.

Perform external actions of fervor, although
you may perform them without the least relish ;
such as embracing the crucifix, clasping it to your
breast, kissing the feet and the hands, lifting up
your eyes and your hands to heaven, raising your
voice to God by words of love and confidence like
these: " My beloved is mine, and I am his. My
beloved is to me a posy of myrrh, he shall dwell
between my breasts. My eyes have fainted after
thee, O my God ! " Say also : " When wilt thou
comfort me? O Jesus, be thou a Jesus to me!
Live, sweet Jesus, and my soul shall live ! Who
shall ever separate me from the love of God ? " etc.

The moderate use of the discipline is also good
against sadness, because this voluntary exterior
affliction begets interior consolation, and the soul,
feeling pain without, diverts herself from the pains
which are within. But frequently the holy com-
munion is the best remedy, because this heavenly
bread strengthens the heart, and rejoices the
spirit.

Disclose to your confessor, with humility and
sincerity, all the feelings, affections, and sug-
gestions which proceed from your sadness. Seek
the conversation of spiritual persons, and frequent
their company as much as you can. In a word,
resign yourself into the hands of God, preparing
yourself to suffer this troublesome sadness with


OF SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS. 313'

patience, as a just punishment of jour vain joys;
and doubt not but that God, after he has tried
you, will deliver you from this evil.


>>k<


CHAPTER XIII.

OF SPIRITUAL AND SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS, AND HOW WE MUSI
BEHAVE OURSELVES IN THEM.

W^QD continues the existence of this great
*«* world in a perpetual vicissitude, by which the
day is always succeeded by the night, the spring
by the summer, the summer by the autumn, the
autumn by the winter, and the winter again by
the spring. One day seldom perfectly resembles
another: some are cloudy, some rainy, some
dry; others windy, — a variety which adds con-
siderably to the beauty of the universe. It is the
same with man, who, according to the saying
of the ancients, is an epitome of the universe, or
another little world ; for he never remains long
in the same state ; his life flows away upon the
earth, like the waters, floating and undulating in
a perpetual diversity of motion, which some-
times lift him up with hope, and sometimes
bring him down with fear ; sometimes carry him
to the right hand by consolation, sometimes to
the left by affliction ; and not one of his days,
no, not even one of his hours, is in every respect
like another.


314 A DEVOUT LIFE.

Now, it is necessary that we should endeavo?
to preserve an inviolable equality of hearl
amidst so great an inequality of occurrences •,
and that, although all things turn and change
around us, we should remain constantly immov-
able ; ever looking and aspiring towards God.
No matter what course the ship may take ; no
matter whether it sails towards the east, west,
north, or south ; no matter by what wind it may
be driven, — never will the needle of the compass
point in any other direction than towards the
fair polar star. Let everything be in confusion,
not only around us, but even within us ; let our
soul be overwhelmed with sorrow or joy ; with
sweetness or bitterness ; with peace or trouble ;
with light or darkness ; with temptation or re-
pose ; with pleasure or disgust ; with dryness or
tenderness; whether it be scorched by the sun
or refreshed by the dew ; yet the point of our
heart, our spirit and our superior will, which is
our compass, must incessantly tend towards the
love of God, its Creator, its Saviour, in a word,
its only sovereign good. fr Whether we live," says
the Apostle, "we live unto the Lord, or whether
we die, we die unto the Lord.'' And " Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ ? " No, nothing
shall separate us from this love ; neither tribula-
tion, nor anguish, nor death, nor life, nor present
^rief, nor the fear of future accidents, nor the
artifices of evil spirits, nor the height of consola-
tions, nor the depth of afflict ions, nor tenderness^
nor dryness, ought ever to separate us from thi?
holy charity which is founded in Jesus Christ,


OF SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS. 315

This first absolute resolution, never to forsake
God, nor to abandon his divine love, serves as a
counterpoise to our souls, to keep them in a holy
equilibrium, amidst the inequality of the several
motions attached to the condition of this life ; foi
as little bees, surprised by a storm in the fields,
embrace small stones, that they may be able to
balance themselves m the air, and not be sc?
easily carried away by the wind ; so our soul,
having by resolution strongly embraced the pre-
cious love of God, continues constant in the midst
of the inconstancy and vicissitude of consolations
and afflictions, whether spiritual or temporal, exte-
rior or interior. But, besides this general doctrine,
we have need of some particular instructions.

1. I say, then- that devotion does not always
consist in that sweetnese, delight, consolation,
or sensible tenderness of heart, which moves us
to tears, and causes us to find satisfaction ir
some spiritual exercises. No, dear Philothea ;
for there are many souls who expedience these
tendernesses and consolations, and whos never-
theless, are very vicious, and consequently have
not a true love of God, much less true devotion.
Saul, pursuing David, who was fleeing before
him in the wilderness of Engaddi, entered alone
into a cavern, in which David and his people lay
concealed. David, who on this occasion had
many opportunities of killing him, spared his
life, and would not even put him in bodily fear;
but, having suffered him to go out at his pleasure,
called after him to prove to him his innocence^
and to convince him that he had been at his


316 A DEVOUT LIFE.

mercy. Now, upon this occasion, what did not
Saul do, to show that his rage against David was
appeased? He called him his child, he wept
aloud, he praised him, he acknowledged his good-
ness, he prayed to God for him, he foretold
his future greatness, and he recommended to
him his posterity. What greater display could
he make of sweetness and tenderness of heart?
Nevertheless his heart was not changed ; neither
did he cease to persecute David as cruelly as
before. In like manner there are some persons,
who, considering the goodness of God, and the
passion of our Saviour, are tenderly affected.
They sigh, weep, pray, and give thanks, in so
feeling a manner that we imagine that they have
acquired an extraordinary degree of devotion ;
but, when the moment of trial arrives, we see,
that as the passing showers of a hot summer,
which fall in large drops on the earth, but do not
sink into it, serve for nothing but to produce
mushrooms, so these tender tears, falling on a
vicious heart, and not penetrating it, are altogether
unprofitable ; for, notwithstanding all this apparent
devotion, these tender souls will not part with a
farthing of the ill-gotten riches they possess ;
nor renounce one of their perverse affections ; nor
suifer the least temporal inconvenience for the
service of our Saviour, over whose sufferings they
have just been weeping ; so that the good affec-
tions which they had were no better than spiritual
mushrooms, and their devotion a mere delusion
of the enemy, who amuses souls with these false
consolations, to make them rest contented, lest tbev


OF SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS. 317

should search any farther after the true and solid
devotion, which consists in a constant, resolute,
prompt, and active will to reduce to practice what-
ever we know to be pleasing to God. A child will
weep tenderly when he sees his mother hied with a
lancet ; but if his mother, for whom he is wTeeping,
would at the same time demand the apple or the
sugar-plums which he had in his hand, he would
by no means part with them ; such is the nature
of our tender devotion, when, contemplating the
stroke of the lancet which pierced the heart of
Jesus Christ crucified, we weep bitterly. Alas,
Philothea ! it is well to lament the painful death
and passion of our Blessed Redeemer ; but why,
then, do we not give him the apple which we have
in our hands, for which he so earnestly asks? why
do we not give him our heart, the only token of
love which our dear Saviour requires of us ? why
do we not resign to him so many petty affections,
delights, and complacencies, which he wants to
pluck out of our hands but cannot, because we
feel more affection for these trifles than his heaAr-
enly grace? Ah, Philothea ! these are the friend-
ships of little children ; tender, indeed, but weak,
capricious, and of no effect. Devotion, then,
consists not in these sensible affections, which
sometimes proceed from a soft nature, susceptible
of any impression we may wish to give it ; some-
times from the enemy, who, to amuse us, stirs up
our imagination to conceive these effects.

2. Yet these tender and delightful affections are
sometimes good and profitable, for they excite the
affections of the soul, strengthen the spirit, and add


818 A DEVOUT LIFE.

to the promptitude of devotion a holy cheerfulness,
which makes our actions lovely and agreeable even
in the exterior. This relish which we find in the
things of God is that which made David exclaim :
" O Lord, how sweet are thy words to my palate !
more than honey to my mouth." Doubtless the
least consolation of devotion that we receive is in
every respect preferable to the most agreeable
recreations of the world. The breasts of the heav-
enly Spouse are sweeter to the soul than the wine
of the most delicious pleasures on earth. He that
has once tasted this sweetness esteems all other
consolations no better than gall and wormwood.
There is a certain herb, the taste of which is said
to impart such sweetness as to prevent hunger and
thirst ; so they to whom God has given the heav-
enly manna can neither desire nor relish the con-
solations of the world, so far at least as to fix their
affections on them ; they are little foretastes of
those immortal delights which God has in reserve
for the souls that seek him ; they are little delica-
cies which he gives to his children to allure them ;
they are the cordials with which he strengthens
them, and they are also sometimes the earnest of
eternal felicity. It is said that Alexander the
Great, sailing on the ocean, discovered Arabia
Felix, by perceiving the fragrant odors which the
wind bore thence, and thereupon encouraged both
himself and his companions ; so we oftentimes re-
ceive these sweet consolations in this sea of our
mortal life, which doubtless must give us a certain
foretaste of the delights of that heavenly country
to which we tend and asuire.


OF SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS. 319

3. But you will perhaps say, since there are
sensible consolations which are good, because they
come from God ; and others unprofitable, danger-
ous, and even pernicious, that proceed either from
nature, or from the enemy, — - how shall I be able to
distinguish the one from the other, or know those
that are evil or unprofitable, from those that are
good? It is a general doctrine, dear Philothea,
with regard to the affections and passions of our
souls, that we must know them by their fruits.
Our hearts are the trees, the affections and passions
are the branches, and their words and actions are
the fruit. That heart is good which has good
affections, and those affections and passions are
good which produce in us good effects and hoh>
actions. If this sweetness, tenderness, and con-
solation make us more humble, patient, tractable,
charitable, and compassionate towards our neigh-
bor ; more fervent in mortifying our concupis-
cences and evil inclinations ; more constant in
our exercises ; more pliant and submissive to those
\vhom we ought to obey ; more sincere and upright
in our lives, — then, doubtless, Plr'lothea, they pro-
ceed from God. But if these consolations have
no sweetness but for ourselves ; if they make us
curious, harsh, quarrelsome, impatient, obstinate,
haughty, presumptuous, and rigorous towards our
neighbor, when we already imagine ourselves to
be saints, and disdain to be any longer subject to
direction or correction, they are then, beyond all
doubt, false and pernicious ; for a good tree cannot
Hring forth bad fruit.

4. Whenever we experience these consolations


320 A DEVOUT LIFE.

we must humble ourselves exceedingly before God,
and beware of saying, u Oh, how good am I ! " No,
Philothea, these considerations, as I have already
said, cannot make us better ; devotion does not
consist in them ; but let us say : ff Ob, how good is
God to such as hope in him, to the soul that seeks
him!" 1. As the bare perception of something
sweet cannot be said to render the palate itself
sweet ; so although this principal sweetness be
excellent, and though God who gives it is sover-
eignly good, yet it follows not that he who receives
it is also good. 2. Let us acknowledge that we
are as yet but little children, who have need of
milk, and that these dainties are given to us
because our tender and delicate spirit stands in
need of some allurement to entice us to the love
of God. 3. Let us afterwards humbly accept
these extraordinary graces and favors, and esteem
them, not so much on account of their excellence,
as because it is the hand of God which puts them
into our hearts, as a mother would do, who, the
more to please her child, puts the dainties into his
mouth with her own hand, one by one ; for if the
child has understanding he sets a greater value on
the tenderness of his mother than the delicious
morsels which he receives ; and thus, Philothea, it
is a great matter to taste the sweetness of sensible
consolations, but it is infinitely more sweet to con-
sider that it is his most loving and tender hand that
puts them, as it wTere, into our mouth, our heart,
our soul, and our spirit. 4. Having thus humbly
received them, let us carefully employ them accord-
ing to the intention of the donor. Now, to what


OF SENSIBLE CONSOLATIONS. 321

end, think you, does God give us these sweet con-
solations? To make us sweet towards every one,
and excite us to love him. The mother ogives little
presents to her child to induce him to embrace her ;
iet us, then, embrace our blessed Saviour, who
grants us these favors. But to embrace him is to
obey him, to keep his commandments, do his will,
and follow his desires, with a tender obedience and
fidelity. Whenever, therefore, we receive any
spiritual consolation, we must be more diligent in
doing good, and in humbling ourselves. 5. Besides
all this we must, from time to time, renounce those
sweet and tender consolations, by withdrawing our
heart from them, and protesting that, although we
humbly accept them and love them because God
sends them, and that they excite us to his love, yet
it is not these we seek, but God himself, and his
holy love ; not the consolations, but the comforter ;
not their deliciousness, but the sweet Saviour ; not
their tenderness, but him that is the delight of
heaven and earth. It is in this manner we ought
to dispose ourselves to persevere in the holy love
of God, although throughout our whole life we
were never to meet with any consolation, and be
^eady to say, as well upon Calvary as upon Thabor :
"Lord ! it is good for me to be with thee, whether
thou be upon the cross, or in thy glory. " 6. To
conclude, I admonish you, that should you experi-
ence any great abundance of such consolations,
tenderness, tears, sweetness, etc., you must confer
faithfully with your spiritual director, that you
may learn how to moderate and behave yourself
under them, for it is written. " Thou has found


322 A DEVOUT LIFE.

honey, eat what is sufficient for thee." Prov,
xxv. 16.

CHAPTER XIV.

OF SPIRITUAL DRYNESS.

>7J|S long as consolation may last, do as I have
^k just now directed you, dear Philothea ! But
this fine and agreeable weather will not always con-
tinue, for sometimes you shall find yourself so
absolutely destitute of all feeling of devotion that
your soul shall seem to be a wild, fruitless, barren
desert, in which there is no trace of a pathway to
find her God, nor any water of grace to refresh
her, on account of the dryness which seems to
threaten her with a total and absolute desolation.
Alas ! how much does a poor soul in such a state
deserve compassion ; but especially when the evil
is vehement ; for then, in imitation of David, she
feeds herself with tears night and day ; while the
enemy, to cast her into despair, mocks her by a
thousand suggestions of despondency, saying : "Ah !
poor wretch, where is thy God? By what path
shalt thou be able to find him? TVho can ever
restore to thee the joy of his holy grace?"

What shall you then do, Philothea? Examine
the source whence this evil has flowed to you : for
we ourselves are often the cause of our spiritual
dryness. 1. As a mother refuses to gratify the
appetite of her child, when such gratification mi^ht


OF SPIRITUAL. DRYNESS. 323

increase its indisposition, so God withholds consola-
tions from us, when we take 51 vain complacency
in them, and are subject to the spiritual maladies
of self-conceit and presumption. " It is good for
me that thou hast humbled me " ; yes, " for before
I was humbled I offended." Ps. cxviii. 2. When
we neglect to gather the sweetness and delights of
the love of God at the proper season, he removes
them from us in punishment of our sloth. The Israel-
ite, who neglected to gather the manna betimes,
could gather none after sunrise, for it had then all
melted. 3. We are sometimes pleased in the bed
of sensual consolations, as the sacred Spouse was
in the Canticles ; the Spouse of our soul comes and
knocks at the door of our heart, and invites us to
return to our spiritual exercises ; but we put them
off, because we are unwilling to quit these vain
amusements, and false satisfactions ; for this reason
he departs, and permits us to slumber. But after-
wards, when we desire to seek him, it is with great
difficulty that we find him ; and it is no more than
what we have justly deserved, since we have been
so unfaithful and disloyal as to refuse the partici-
pation of his love, to enjoy the consolations of the
world. Ah ! if you still keep the flour of Egypt,
you shad not Lave the manna of heaven. "Bees
detest artificial odors ; and the sweetness of the
Holy Spirit is incompatible with the counterfeit
delights of the world.

4. The doublb-dealing and subtlety which we
use in our spiritual communications with our di-
rector may also produce spiritual dryness ; for,
since you lie to the Holy Ghost, it is no wonder he


324 A. DEVOUT LIFE.

should refuse his consolations. If you will not be
as sincere and plain as a little child, you shall not,
then, have the sugar-plums of little children.

5. If you have glutted yourself with worldly
pleasures it is no wonder that you should find an
unsavory taste in spiritual delights. When birds
have once satiated their appetite the most delicious
berries appear to them distasteful. "He hath
filled the hungry with good things," says our blessed
Lady. Luke ii. 33. " And the rich he hath sent
away empty." They that are glutted with the pleas-
ures of the world are not capable of the delights
of the Spirit.

6. If you have been careful to preserve the
fruits of the consolations which you have received,
you shall receive new ones ; for, to him that
has, more shall be given; but he that has not
kept, but lost, what was given him, through
his own fault, shall never receive those graces
which had been prepared for him. Rain enlivens
green plants, but it destroys those that have lost
their verdure.

There are several causes which occasion our
fall from the consolations of devotion into dryness
and barrenness of spirit. Let us, then, examine
whether we can find any of them in ourselves ;
but observe, Philothea, that this examination is
not to be made either with inquietude or too much
curiosity ; but if, after having faithfully considered
our comportment, we find the cause of the evil to
originate in ourselves, let us thank God for the
discovery; for the evil is half cured when the
cause of it is known ; but if, on the contrary, you


OF SPIRITUAL DRYNESS* 325

can find nothing in particular which may seem to
have occasioned this dryness, trouble not yourself
about making any further inquiry, but with all
simplicity do as I shall now advise you.

1. Humble yourself very much before God,
by acknowledging your own nothingness and
misery. Alas ! 6 Lord, what am I when left to
myself but a dry, parched soil, which, far from
receiving those showers, of which it stands in so
so great need, is exposed to the wind, and thus
reduced to dust. 2. Call upon God, and beg
comfort of him. "Restore unto me the joy oi
thy salvation. Father, if it be possible, let thk
chalice pass from me." Away, thou barren north
wind, that witherest my soul ; and blow, gentle
gale of consolations, upon the garden of my heart,
that its good affections may diffuse the odor of
sweetness. 3. Go to your confessor, and open-
ing to him the several plaits and folds of your
soul, follow his advice with the utmost simplicity
and humility; for God, who is well pleased with
obedience, frequently renders the counsels we
take from others, but especially from those who
are the guides of our soul, profitable, when other-
wise there might be no great appearance of success ;
as he imparted healing qualities to the waters of
Jordan, the use of which Eliseus had, without any
appearance of human reason, prescribed to Xaaman.
4 Kings v. 14. 4. But, after all this, there is
nothing so profitable, so fruitful, in a state of
spiritual dryness, as not to suffer our affections to
be too strongly fixed upon the desire of being
delivered from it. I do not say that we ouo-ht


#26 A DEVOUT LIFE.

not simply to wish for a deliverance, but that we
should not set our heart upon it ; but rather yield
ourselves up to the pure mercy and special provi-
dence of God, that he may make use of us to serve
him as long as he pleases. In the midst of these
thorns and deserts let us say, "Father, if it be
possible, let this chalice pass from me"; but let
us also add, courageously, "nevertheless, not my
will, but thine, be done." But here let us stop with
as much tranquillity as possible ; for God, behold-
ing this holv indifference, will comfort us with
many graces and favors; as was the case with
Abraham when he resolved to deprive himsell of
his son Isaac. God, who contented himself with
seemo- him in this disposition of a pure resignation,
comforted him with a most delightful vision,
accompanied by the most consolatory benedictions.
We ought, then, under all kinds of afflictions,
whether corporal or spiritual, and amidst all the
distractions or subtractions of sensible devotion
which may happen to us, to say from the bottom
of our heart, with profound submission, Job i. 21,
"The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ;
blessed be the name of the Lord." For, if we
continue in this humility, he will restore us his
delightful favors as he did to Job, who constantly
used the like words in his desolations.

Finally, Philothea, in the midst of our spiritual
dryness, let us never lose courage, but wait with
patience for the return of consolation. Let us not
omit any of our exercises of devotion, but, it
possible, let us multiply our good works ; and,
not being able to present to our dear Spouse the


OF SPIRITUAL DRYNESS. 327

most exquisite dishes, let us offer him such as we
can procure ; for he is indifferent, provided the
heart which offers them be perfectly fixed in the
resolution of loving him. When the spring is fair
the bees make more honey, and produce fewer
young ones ; for, when the line weather favors
them, they are so busy in their harvest among the
flowers that they forget the production of their
young ; but when the spring is sharp and cloudy
they produce more young ones, and less honey;
for, not being able to go abroad to gather honey,
they employ themselves at home to ircrease and
multiply their race. Thus it happens frequently,
Philothea, that the soul, finding herself in the fair
spring of spiritual consolations, amuses herself so
much in enjoying their sweetness, that in the abun-
dance of these delights she produces fewer good
works ; whilst, on the contrary, in the midst of
spiritual dryness, the more destitute she finds
herself of the consolations of devotion, the more
she multiplies her good works, and abounds in the
interior generation of the virtues of patience,
humility, self-contempt, resignation, and renun-
ciation of self-love.

Many persons, especially women, falsely imagine
that the spiritual exercises which they perform
without relish, tenderness of heart, or sensible
satisfaction, are less agreeable to the divine Maj-
esty. Our actions are like roses, which when
fresh have more beauty, yet when dry have more
strength and sweetness. Our works performed
with tenderness of heart are more agreeable to
ourselves, who regard only our own satisfaction,


328 A DEVOUT LIFE.

yet when performed in the time of dryness they
possess more sweetness, and become more precious
in the sight of God. Yes, dear Philothea, in the
time of dryness our will forces us to the service
of God, as it were, by violence ; and, consequently,
it must necessarily be more vigorous and constant
than in the time of consolation.

It is not great merit to serve a prince in the
time of peace, amongst the delights of the court ; but
to serve him amidst the hardships of war troubles
and persecutions is a true mark of constancy and
fidelity. The Blessed Angela de Fulgino says,
that the prayer which is most acceptable to God
is that which we make by force and constraint ;
the prayer to which we apply ourselves, not for
the pleasure which we find in it, nor by inclination,
but purely to please God ; to which our will carries
us against our inclinations, violently forcing its
way through the midst of those clouds of avidity
which oppose it. I say the same of every kind of
good works, whether interior or exterior; for, the
aiore repugnance we feel in performing them, the
more agreeable they are in the sight of God. The
less we consult our particular interest in the pur-
suit of virtues, the more brilliantly does the purity
of divine love shine forth in them. A child easily
is naturally affectionate to his mother when she
o-ives him su^ar ; but it is a sign of a great love if
he manifests the same affection after she has given
him wormwood, or any other bitter potion.


EXAMPLE O* SPIRITUAL DRYNESS. 329


CHAPTER XV.

A REMARKABLE EXAMPLE IN CONFIRMATION OF THE PRE'
CEDING REMARKS.

Jf^O illustrate the whole cf this instruction 1
<c&> will here relate an excellent passage from the
history of St. Bernard, as I found it in a learned
and judicious writer. Almost all, says he, who
begin to serve God, and are not as yet experienced
in the subtractions of grace, and in spiritual vicissi-
tudes, finding themselves deprived of the sweet-
ness of sensible devotion, and that agreeable light
which invites them to run forward in the way of
Gcd, presently lose breath, and fall into pusil-
lanimity and sadness. Persons of judgment ac-
count for this by saying that our rational nature
cannot continue, for a long time, famished, as it
were, and without some kind of delight, either
heavenly or earthly. Now, as souls that are ele-
vated above themselves, by the enjoyment of
spiritual pleasures, easily renounce visible objects ;
so when, by the divine disposition, spiritual joy is
withdrawn from them, finding themselves at the
same tune deprived of corporal consolations, and
not being as yet accustomed to wait with patience
for the return of the true sun, it seems to them as
if they were neither in heaven nor on earth, and
that they shall remain buried in a perpetual night .
Thus, like little infants who have been weaned
from the breast, they languish and moan, and be-


330 A DEVOUT LIFE.

come fretful and troublesome to every one, and
especially to themselves. The following circum-
stance happened, in a journey mentioned in this
histoiy, to one of the company, named Geoffry of
Peroime, who had lately dedicated himself to the
service of God. Being suddenly deprived of con ■
solation, and overwhelmed with interior disgust,
he began to remember his worldly friends, his
kindred, and the riches which he had lately for-
saken ; by which he was assaulted with so strong
a temptation that, not being able to conceal it in
his behavior, one of his greatest confidants per-
ceived it, and, having taken an opportunity, ac-
costed him with mildness, and said to him in
private, "What means this, Geoffry? Whence
comes it, that, contrary to custom, thou art so
pensive and melancholy ?" — "Ah, brother!" an-
swered Geoffry, with a deep sigh, ffI shall never,
never more be joyful whilst I live." The other,
moved to pity at these words, went immediately,
with fraternal zeal, and told it to their common
father, St. Bernard, who, perceiving the danger,
went into the next church to pray to God for
him; whilst Geoffry, in the meantime, being
overwhelmed with sadness, and resting his head
upon a stone, fell asleep. Shortly after both of
them arose, the one from prayer, having obtained
the favor he had asked for, and the other from a
sleep, but with so pleasant and serene a counte-
nance that his friend, surprised at so great and
sudden a change, could not refrain from gently
reproaching him with the answer he had a little
before given him, to which Geoffry replied, " If I


EXAMPLE OF SPIRITUAL DRYNESS. 33l

told thee before, that I should never more be joy-
ful, I now assure thee that I shall never more be
sorrowful."

Such was the issue of the temptation of this de-
vout person. But observe, in this relation, dear
Philothea, 1. That God commonly grants some
foretaste of heavenly delight to such as enter into
his service, in order to withdraw them from earthly
pleasures, and encourage them in the pursuit of
divine love ; as a mother who, to allure her little
infant to her breasts, puts honey upon them. 2.
That, according to the secret designs of his provi-
dence, he :s pleased to withhold from us the milk
and honey of consolation, that, by weaning us in
this manner, we may learn to feed on the more dry
and solid bread of a vigorous devotion, exercised
under the trials of disgust and spiritual dryness.
3. That, as violent temptations frequently arise
during this desolating aA'idity, we must resolutely
fight against them, since they proceed not from
God ; but. nevertheless, we must patiently suffer
the avidity itself, since God has ordained it for
the exercise of our virtue. 4. That we must
never lose courage amidst those interior pains and
conflicts, nor say with good Geoffry, "I shall never
more be joyful " ; for in the midst of the darkness
of the night we must look for the return of day-
light : and, again, in the fairest spiritual weather
we must not say, I shall never more be sorrowful ;
for, as the wise man says, "In the day of good
things be not unmindful of evils." Eccles. xi.
27. T\re must hope in the midst of afflictions,
and fear in the midst of prosperity ; and on both


332 A DEVOUT LIFE.

occasions we must always humble ourselves. 5.
That it is a sovereign remedy to discover our evil
to some spiritual friend, who may be able to give
us comfort.

I think it necessary to observe, Philothea, that
in these conflicts God and our spiritual enemy have
contrary designs. Our good God seeks to con-
duet us to perfect purity of heart, to an entire
renunciation of self-interest in what relates to his
service and to an absolute self-denial ; whereas
our internal foe endeavors, by these severe trials,
to discourage us from the practice of prayer, and
entice us back to sensual pleasures, that by thus
making us troublesome to ourselves and to others
he may discredit holy devotion. But, provided you
observe the lessons I have given you, you will,
amidst these interior afflictions, rapidly advance
in the way of perfection. I cannot, however, dis-
miss this important subject without adding a few
words more.

It sometimes happens that spiritual dryness pro-
ceeds from an indisposition of body, as when,
through an excess of watching, labor, or fasting,
we find ourselves oppressed by fatigue, drowsiness,
lassitude, and the like infirmities, which, though
they depend on the body, }ret are calculated to in-
commode the spirit also, on account of the inti-
mate connection that subsists between both. Now,
>n such occasions, we must never omit to perform
several acts of virtue with the superior parts of
our souls and the force of our will. For although
our whole soul seems to be asleep, and over-
whelmed with drowTsbiess and fatigue, yet the


EXAMPLE OF SPIRITUAL DRYNESS. 33£

actions of the superior part cease not to be very
acceptable to God ; and we may say at the same
time, with the sacred Spouse, " I sleep, and my
heart watcheth." Cant. v. 2. For, as I have ob-
served before, though there is less satisfaction in
this manner of performing our spiritual exercises,
yet there is more merit and virtue. Now, the
remedy on such occasion is to recruit the strength
and vigor of our body by some kind of lawful rec-
reation. So St. Francis ordained that his religious
should use such moderation in their labors as not
to oppress the fervor of their spirits.

As I am speaking of this glorious father, I must
not forget to tell you that he himself was once as-
saulted by so deep a melancholy of spirit that he
could not help showing it in his behavior ; for if
he desired to converse with his religious he was
unable ; if he withdrew himself from them it was
worse ; abstinence and corporal mortification op-
pressed him, and prayer gave him no relief. He
continued two years in this maimer, so that he
seemed to be quite abandoned by God ; but at
length, after he had humbly suffered this violent
storm, our Saviour, in an instant, restored him to
a happy tranquillity. If, therefore, the greatest
servants of God are subject to these shocks, how
can we be astonished if they sometimes happen
to us?


¥art jFtftfj.


CONTAINING- EXERCISES AND INSTRUCTIONS CALCULATED TO
RENOVATE THE SOUL AND CONFIRM HER IN DEVOTION.


CHAPTER I.

THAT WE OUGHT EVERY YEAR TO RENEW OUR GOOD RESO-
LUTIONS BY THE FOLLOWING EXERCISES.

YTCJi IE first point of these exercises consists in our
^^ being thoroughly sensible of their importance.
Human nature easily falls off from its good affec-
tions, on account of the frailty and evil inclinations
of the flesh, which depress the soul, and draw her
always downwards, unless she often raise herself
up by fervent resolutions ; just as birds which fall
suddenly to the ground if they do not multiply the
strokes of their wings to support themselves in the
air. For this reason, dear Philothea, }~ou must
repeat very often the good resolutions you have
made to serve God, lest, by neglecting to do so,
you should relapse into your former state, or
rather into a worse one ; for spiritual falls always
cast us down to a lower state than that from which
we ascended up to devotion.

As every watch, no matter how good it may
be, must be daily wound up, and now and then
taken asunder, to remove the rust and dust,
and to mend and repair what may be broken or


RENEWAL OF OTTR GOOD RESOLUTIONS. 335

out of order ; so he that is careful of his soul
ought to wind it up daily to God by the forego-
ing exercises, and at least once a year take it
asunder to redress, rectify, and examine dili-
gently all its affections and passions, that all its
defects may be repaired. And as the watchmaker
anoints the wheels, the springs, and all the works,
with some delicate oils, that the motions of the
wheels may be more easy, and the whole of the
watch less subject to rust ; so a devout person,
after taking this review of his heart in order to
renovate it, must anoint it Avith the Sacraments of
Confession and the Holy Eucharist. This ex-
ercise will fortify your spirit, impaired by time,
warm your heart, reanimate your good resolutions,
and make your virtues nourish with fresh vigor.
The primitive Christians were careful to practise
this devotion on the anniversary day of the bap-
tism of our Lord, when, as St. Gregory Xazianzen
relates, they renewed those professions and prot-
estations which are usually made in baptism. Let
us, also, my dearPhilothea, seriously dispose our-
selves to follow their example. Having, then, for
this purpose, chosen the most convenient time,
according to the advice of your spiritual father,
and withdrawn yourself into a little more solitude
than ordinary, make one, two, or three meditations
on the following points, according to the method
I have prescribed in the second part.


336 A DEVOUT LIFE.


CHAPTER II.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE FAVOR WHICH GOD DOES US, IN

CALLING US TO HIS SERVICE, ACCORDING TO THE

PROTESTATIONS SET DOWN HERETOFORE.

^^ONSIDER the points of your protestation.
^^ First, that you would forsake, cast away, de-
test, and renounce forever all moral sin ; secondly,
that you would dedicate and consecrate your soul,
heart, and body, with all their faculties, to the
love and service of God ; thirdly, that, if you
should chance to fall into any sin, you would im-
mediately rise again by the help of God's grace.
Are not these just, noble, and generous resolu-
tions? Consider well in thy soul, then, how holy
and reasonable this protestation is, and how much
to be desired.

2. Consider to whom you have made this prot-
estation ; for it is to God. If our word given to
men bind us strictly, how much more when we
have given it to God ! " It is to thee, O Lord ! "
said David, "my heart hath spoken it, my heart
hath uttered a good word. Oh, I will never for-
get it," Ps. xliv.

3. Consider that you made this protestation in
the presence of the whole court of heaven. Ah,
yes ! the Blessed Virgin, St. Joseph, your good
angel, your holy patron, and all that blessed com-
pany, beheld you, and their hearts were filled
with joy and exultation at your words ; they


ON THE FAVOR OF BEING CALLED. 337

saw, with the eyes of unspeakable love, your heart
prostrate at the feet of your Saviour, consecrating
itself to his service. As there was a particular
joy on that occasion in the heavenly Jerusalem, so
there will be now a commemoration of the same,
if, with-a sincere heart, you renew your resolutions.

4. Consider by what means you were induced
to make your protestation. Ah ! how good and
gracious was God to von at that time ! Oh, tell
me sincerely, were you not invited to it by the
sweet attractions of the Holy Ghost ? Were
not the cords, with which God drew your little
boat to this blessed haven, composed of love and
charity? How earnestly did he seek to allure
you to it by the divine sweetness of the sacra-
ments, spiritual reading, and prayer ! Alas, dear
Philothea ! you were asleep, whilst God watched ;
he thought over your souTs thoughts of peace, and
meditated in your favor meditations of love.

5. Consider that God inspired you with these
holy resolutions in the flower of your age. Ah !
what a happiness it is to learn early that which
we cannot know but too late ! St. Austin, having
been called at the age of thirty years, exclaimed,
" O ancient beauty ! whence is it that I have
known thee so late? Alas! I saw thee before,
but I considered thee not " ; and you may well say,
O ancient sweetness ! why did I not relish thee
before? Alas ! you did not even then deserve it.
However, acknowledging the special favor God
has done you in attracting you to himself in your
youth, say with David, "Thou hast taught me, O
God, from my youth ; and till now I will declare


338 A DEVOUT LIFE.

thy wonderful works." Ps. lxx. 17. But if this
aas happened in your old age, ah ! Philothea,
what an extraordinary grace, that, after having thu?
misspent all your former years, God should call
you before your death, and stop the course of your
misery at a time, in which, if it had continued,
you must have been miserable for eternity !

Consider ihe effects of this vocation, and, com-
paring what you now are with what you have
been, you will doubtless find in yourself a great
change for the better. Do you not esteem it a
happiness to know how to converse with God
by prayer; to be inflamed with a desire of loving
him ; to have obtained a complete victory over the
many passions with which you were troubled; to
have avoided innumerable sins and perplexities of
conscience ; and, in fine, to have communicated
so much oftener than you would have done, unit-
ing yourself to that sovereign, source of never-
ending orace? Ah, how great are these favors'
We must weigh them, Philothea, in the scales of
the sanctuary ; it is God's right hand that has
done all this. " The right hand of the Lord," says
David, "hath exalted me; I shall not die, but
live, and shah declare with my heart, with my
mouth, and by my actions, the wonderful works
of the Lord." Ps. cxvii.

After ail these considerations, which must doubt-
less furnish you with abundance of pious affections,
conclude simply with an act of thanksgiving and
fervent prayer, that you may make good use of
them ; retire with the most profound humility and
the utmost confidence in God, deferring the making


OX ADVANCING IX DEVOTION. 339

the effort of your resolutions till after the second
point of this exercise.


CHAPTER III.

EXAMINATION OF OUR SOUL ON ITS ADVANCEMENT IN DEVOTION.

|3JsS the second part of the exercise is rather long,
3*^ in order to practise it I must tell you that it
is not necessary that you should perform it all at
once, but at different times, considering your du-
ties towards God, at one time ; what relates to
yourself, at another ; what concerns your neighbor,
at a third ; and your passions, at the fourth.
Neither would I advise you to perform it on your
knees, except at the beginning and the end, which
comprise the affections. The other points of the
examination you may perform profitably whilst
walking abroad, cr still more profitably in bed,
provided that you can preserve yourself against
drowsiness, and keep thoroughly awake ; but then,
to do this, you must read them attentively before-
hand. It is necessary, however, to go through
the whole of the second point in three days and
two nights at most, dedicating as much time to
it on each day and night as you conveniently
can ; for if this exercise should be deferred to times
far distant from each other it would lose its force,
and make but weak impressions.

After each point of the examination you mus*


340 A DEVOUT LIFE.

remark in what you shall find yourself to have
failed ; in what you are still defective, and the
nature of the principal disorders you have discov-
ered, that you may declare them to your confessor,
in order to obtain his advice, and acquire reso-
lution and spiritual strength to overcome them.
Although on the days on which you perform this
and the other exercises it is not absolutely neces-
sary to withdraw yourself from all company, yet
}^ou must be more retired than usual, especially
towards the evening, that you may sooner go to
bed, and take that repose of body and mind which
is necessary for consideration. You must also,
during the day, make frequent aspirations to God,
to the Blessed Virgin, to the angels, and to the
whole court of heaven ; moreover, all this must be
done with a heart totaily inflamed with the love
of God, and a desire of attaining perfection.

To begin, then, this examination properly,
1. Place yourself in the presence of God. 2.
Invoke the Holy Ghost, begging of him to en-
lighten your understanding, that you may attain a
perfect knowledge of yourself, crying out, with St.
Austin, to God in the spirit of humility, " OLord !
let me know thee, and let me know myself" ; and
with St. Francis, asking of God, " Lord ! who art
thou, and who am I ? " Protest that it is not your
intention to acquire this knowledge in order to at-
tribute any glory to yourself on the occasion, but
that you may rejoice in God, return him thanks,
and glorify his blessed name for all benefits.
Protest likewise, that if you find, as you fear you
shall, that you made but little or no advancement,


STATE OF OUR SOUL TOWARDS GOD. 341

or even that you have gone backward, you will
not 011 that account be discouraged, stow colder,
or be overcome by pusillanimity or faint-hearted-
ness j but that, on the contrary, you will encourage
and animate yourself, humble yourself the more,
and apply, with the assistance of divine grace, the
proper remedies to your defects. Afterwards
consider calmly how you have behaved to the pres-
ent hour towards God, your neighbor, and your-
self.


-»o>*Sc


CHAPTER TV.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE STATE OF OUR SOUL TOWARDS GOD.

EO.W stands your heart with respect to mortal

* sin? Are you firmly resolved never to com-
mit it, on any account whatever? Has this reso-
lution continued from the time of your protestation
till the present moment ? In this resolution consists
the foundation of the spiritual life.

How is your heart disposed with regard to the
commandments of God? Do you find them good,
sweet, and agreeable? Ah! my child, he Avhose
taste is in good order, and whose stomach is sound,
loves good meat and rejects bad.

How is your heart affected with regard to venial
sin ? We cannot keep ourselves so pure as not to
tall now and then into such sins ; but is there none
to which you have a particular inclination ; or.


342 A DEVOUT LIFE.

tfhat would be still worse, is there none to which
you bear an affection and love?

Plow is your heart affected with regard to spir-
itual exercises? Do you love them? Do you
esteem them? Do they not make you uneasy?
Are you not disgusted with them? To which of
them do you find yourself more or less inclined?
To hear the word of God, to read it, to discourse
of it, to meditate, to aspire to God, to go to con-
fession, to receive spiritual counsel, to prepare
yourself for communion, to communicate, to re-
strain your affections, — in all this, what is there to
which you feel repugnance? If you find anything
to which your heart has less inclination, examine
the cause whence this dislike arises, and apply the
remedy.

How stands your heart towards God himself!
Does it delight in the remembrance of God ? Does
this remembrance leave an agreeable sweetness be-
hind it ? " Ah ! " said David^ " I remembered God,
and I was delighted." Does your heart feel an in-
clination to love God, and a particular satisfaction
in relishing this love ? Does not your heart love to
reflect on the immensity of God, on his goodness,
on his sweetness? If the remembrance of God
comes to you amidst the occupations and vanities
of the world, do you not willingly receive it?
Does it not seize upon your heart? Does it not
seem to you that your heart turns towards that
side, and, as it were, runs to meet her God? Cer-
tainly there are such souls to be found.

When the husband of an affectionate wife re-
turns home from a distant country, as soon as she


STATE OF OUR SOUL TOWARDS GOD. 343

is sensible of his approach, or hears his voice,
although she be ever so much engaged in business,
or forcibly detained from him by some urgent
occupation, yet her heart is not withheld from
him, but leaps over all other thoughts to think on
her husband, who is returned. It is the same
with souls that love God well ; let them be ever
so busy, when the remembrance of God comes
near them they lose almost the thought of all
things else, so rejoiced are they that this dear
remembrance is returned ; and this is a very good
sign.

How is your heart affected towards Jesus Christ,
God, and man? Do you place your happiness in
him? As bees find pleasure in their honey, and
wasps in corrupted things, so good souls seek
their happiness in thinking on Jesus Christ, and
feel a tender affection towards him ; but the wicked
please themselves about vanities.

How is your heart affected towards the blessed
Virgin, the saints, and your good angel? Do you
love them ? Have you a special confidence in their
patronage? Are you pleased with their pictures,
their lives, and their praises?

As to your tongue : how do you speak of God ?
Do you find pleasure in speaking well of him, ac-
cording to your condition and ability? Do you
love to sing his praises?

As to works : consider whether you take the
exterior glory of God to heart, and are emulous
of doinsr something for his honor ; for such as
love God love, like David, the adorning of his
aouse.


344 A DEVOUT LIFE.

Can you discover that you have forsaken any
affection, or renounced anything for the sake of
God? for it is a good sign of love to deprive our-
selves of anything in favor of him whom we love.
What, then, have you hitherto forsaken for the lovt»
of God?


>^<


CHAPTER V.

AN EXAMINATION OF OUR STATE WITH REGARD TO

OURSELVES.

HfOW do you love yourself? Do you not love
Wk yourself too much for this world? If so, you
will desire to live always here and be very solic-
itous to establish yourself on this earth ; but if
you love yourself for heaven, you will desire, or
at least be willing, to depart hence at whatever
hour it shall please our Lord.

Do you observe due order in the love of your-
self? For the inordinate love of ourselves is the
only thing that will cause our ruin. Now, a well-
ordered love requires that we should love the soul
more than the body; that we should be more
solicitous to acquire virtue than anything else;
the we should set a higher estimation on the fa-
vor of heaven than on the honor of this low
and perishable world. A well-ordered heart will
oftener say within itself, "What will the angels
say, if I think upon such a thing?" than "What
will men say?"


LOVE FOR OURSELVES. 345

What kind of love have you for your own heart?
Are you not willing to serve it in its infirmities?
Alas ! you ought to assist it, and procure assist-
ance for it, whenever passions torment it, and
for this purpose to neglect every other considera-
tion.

What do you esteem yourself before God?
Doubtless nothing. It is no great humility in a
fly to esteem herself nothing in comparison of a
mountain ; nor for a drop of water to hold itself
for nothing in comparison of the sea ; nor for a
spark of lire to hold itself nothing in respect to
the sun ; but humility consists in not esteeming
ourselves above others, and in not desiring to be
so esteemed by others. How are you disposed
in this respect ?

As to your tongue : Do you not sometimes
boast of yourself in one way or another? Do
you not flatter yourself in speaking of yourself?

As to recreation : Do you allow yourself pleasure
contrary to your health, — I mean vain or unprofit-
able pleasure ; such, for example, as that which
prevents you from retiring to bed at a proper hour
•and the like ?


346 A DEVOUT LITE.


CHAPTER VI.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE STATE OF OUR SOUL TOWARDS OUR
NEIGHBOR.

-YJfHE love of husband and wife ought to be
US SWeet and tranquil, constant and persevering,
and this principally because the will of God re-
quires it. I say the same of the love of our
children, our near relations, and our friends,
every one according to his rank.

But, to speak in general, how is your heart
affected towards your neighbor? Do you love
him from your heart, and for the love ot Uod.'
To discern this well you must represent to your-
self troublesome and disagreeable persons, for it
is among them that we exercise the love ot Uod
towards our neighbor, and much more among
those who injure us, either by their actions or
words Examine well whether your heart be well
disposed towards them, or whether you do not find
a o-reater repugnance to love them.

Are you not apt to speak ill of your neighbor,
and especiallv of such as do not love you? Do
vou refrain from doing evil to your neighbor,
either directly or indirectly? Provided you be
reasonable, vou will easily perceive it,


AFFECTIONS OF THE SOUL. 347

CHAPTER VII.

Kf\ EXAMINATION OF THE AFFECTIONS OF OUR SOUL.

HAVE thus protracted these points, in the ex-
amination of which consists the knowledge of our
spiritual advancement ; for the examination of sin
is rather for the confession of such as think not
seriously of advancing in devotion.

We must not, however, delay too long on any
of these points, but consider gently in what state
our heart has been with regard to them, and what
considerable faults we have committed.

But, to abridge the whole, we must reduce the
examen to a search into our passions ; and if it be
inconvenient to consider every point in particular,
as has been said, we may examine in general what
have been our dispositions, and how we have be-
haved ourselves in our love to God, our neighbor,
and ourselves ; in our hatred for our own sins, and
for those of others, — for we desire the extirpation
of both ; in our desires relating to riches, pleasures,
and honors ; in our fear of the dangers of sin, and
in that of the loss of our worldly goods, — for we
are apt to fear the one too much, and the other too
little ; in our hope, placing too much reliance on
the world and creatures, and too little on God and
things eternal ; in an inordinate sadness, or exces-
sive joy for vain things. In a word, we must
examine what affections entangle our heart, what
passions possess it, in what it has principally


348 A DEVOUT LIFE.

strayed out of the way ; for by the passions we
may judge of the state of the soul, by examining
them one after the other ; and, as he that plays on
the lute, by touching all the strings finds which
are out of tune, and makes them accord either by
winding them up, or letting them down ; so, if after
having examined the passions of love, hatred,
desire, hope, sadness, and joy in our soul, we find
them out of tune for that harmony which we desire
to make to the greater glory of God, we may ac-
cord them by means of his grace, and the counsel
of our spiritual director.


CHAPTER VIII.

AFFECTIONS TO BE FORMED AFTER THIS EXAMINATION.

|7JgFTER having quietly considered each point of
£& the examination into the state of your soul,
you must afterwards proceed to the affections in
this manner : —

1. Return thanks to God for the little amend-
ment you may have found in your life since your
resolution, and acknowledge that it has been his
mercy alone that has wrought it in and for you.

2. Humble yourself exceedingly before God,
acknowledging that, if you have not advanced
much, it has been through your own fault, because
you have not faithfully, courageously, and con-
stantly corresponded with the inspirations, graces,


RENEWING OUR GOOD RESOLUTIONS. 349

and affections which he has given you in prayer,
and at other times.

3. Promise that you will eternally praise him
for the graces which he has bestowed on you, and
for having withdrawn you from your evil inclina-
tions, to make this little amendment.

4. Ask pardon for your infidelity and disloyalty
in not corresponding with his graces.

5. Offer him your heart, that he may make him-
self the sole master of it.

6. Beseech him to make you forever faithful to
him.

7. Invoke the saints, the blessed Virgin, your
good angel, your holy patron, St. Joseph, and the
whole court of heaAren.


CHAPTER IX.

CONSIDERATIONS PROPER TO RENEW OUR GOOD RESOLUTIONS.

IJJlFTER having made your examination, and
^^ conferred with sunie worthy director concern-
ing your defects, and the proper remedies for them,
make use of one of the following considerations
every day, by way of meditation, employing in it
the time of your mental prayer, observing always
the same method with regard to the preparation
i)tid the affections as you did in the meditations of the
first part, by placing yourself first in the presence
of God, and then imploring his grace to establish
you in his holy love and service.


J50 A DEVOUT LIFE.

CHAPTER X.

THE FIRST CONSIDERATION. — THE EXCELLENCE OF OUR SOUL

IfpOXSIDEB, the worth and excellence of your
&& immortal soul, which is endued with an
understanding capable of knowing, not only this
visible world, but also that there are angels, an
eternity, a heaven, and a most high sovereign, and
ineffable God, and which, moreover, knows the
means of living well in this visible world, that she
may one day be associated with the angels of
heaven, and enjoy God for all eternity.

Consider, also, that your soul has a will capable
of loving God, and cannot hate him in himself.
Take a view of your heart, and behold how gener-
ous it is ; and that, as bees can never stay upon any
corrupt thing, but only stop among the flowers, so
no creature can ever satisfy your heart, for it can
never rest but in God alone. Recall to your re-
membrance the dearest and strongest affections
that have hitherto engaged your heart, and judge
in truth, whether, in the midst of them, it was not
ful of anxious inquietudes, tormenting thoughts,
and restless cares.

Our heart, alas ! runs eagerly in pursuit of
creatures, thinking that they will satisfy its desires ;
"hut as soon as it has overtaken them it rinds its
satisfaction still afar off, God being unwilling that
our heart should rind any resting-place, like the
dove which went out of Noah's ark, that it may


THE EXCELLENCE OF VIRTUE. 351

return to himself, from whom it proceeded. Ah !
what natural beauty is there in our heart ! Why,
then, do we detain it against its will in the service
of creatures?

Since, then, O soul ! thou art capable of know-
ing and loving God, why Avilt thou amuse thyself
about anything less than God? Since thou may-
est advance thy claim to eternity, why shouldst
thou amuse thyself about transitory moments ? It
was one of the most sorrowful reflections of the
prodigal son that he might have been faring de-
liciously at his father's table whilst he was feeding
amongst the filthy swine. Since, O my soul ! thou
art capable of God, woe be to thee if thou content
thyself with anything less than God.

Elevate your soul cheerfully with this consid-
eration : remind her that she is immortal, and
worthy of eternity ; animate her with courage on
this subject.

CHAPTER XI.

THE SECOND CONSIDERATION.— THE EXCELLENCE OF VIRTUE.

^KONSIDER that nothing but virtue and devotion
^^ can satisfy your soul in this world. Behold
how beautiful they are, and draw a comparison
between the virtues and their contrary vices.
How amiable is patience, when compared with
revenge! Meekness, compared with anger and
vexation ! Humility, compared with arrogance and


352 A DEVOUT LIFE.

ambition ! Liberality, compared with covetousness !
Charity, in comparison with envy ! Sobriety, com-
pared with revellings ! For virtues have this
admirable quality, that they delight the soul with
an incomparable sweetness and satisfaction after
we have practised them ; whereas vices leave the
soul exceedingly fatigued and disordered. Why,
then, do we not endeavor to acquire this satis-
faction ?

With respect to vices, he that has but little of
them is uneasy, and he that has more of them is
more discontented ; but as for virtues, he that has
but a little has already some contentment, which
increases as the virtues themselves increase.

O devout life ! how fair, how lovely, how sweet
and delightful art thou ! thou alleviatest our tribu-
lations, and addest sweetness to our consolations ;
without thee good is evil, and pleasures are full
of restlessness, trouble, and deceits. Ah ! he who
would know thee well might exclaim, with the
Samaritan woman, " Lord ! give me this water ! " —
an aspiration frequently used by the holy mother
Theresa, and St. Catherine of Genoa, although
upon different occasions.


THE EXAMPLES OF THE SAINTS 353


CHAPTER XII.

(HE THIRD CONSIDERATION. — THE EXAMPLES OF THE SAINTS.

^|50XSIDER the examples of the saints in every
^2) condition of life. What have they not done
to devote themselves entirely to the love and ser-
vice of God? Look on the invincible resolution
of the martyrs ; what torments have they not
suffered in defence of the faith? But, above all,
behold that innumerable train of holy virgins,
whiter than the lilies in purity, fairer than the
roses in charity ; of whom, some at twelve, others
at thirteen, fifteen, twenty, and twenty-five years
of age, have endured a thousand kinds of martyr-
dom, rather than renounce their resolution, not
only with regard to the profession of their faith,
but, also, their protestation of devotion ; some
dying rather than forsake their virginity ; others
rather than desist from the service of their com-
panions in torments, from comforting the aiilicted,
and burying the dead. O good God ! what for-
titude have they not evinced on these occasions !

Consider the unshaken constancy with which so
many holy confessors have despised the world ;
how invincible have they shown themselves in
their resolutions, from which nothing could ever
divert them ; they have embraced them without
reserve, and practised them without exception.
Good God ! what admirable things does St. Austin
relate of his holy mother, St. Monica? With


354 A DEVOUT LIFE.

what constancy did she pursue her determination
of serving God, both in marriage and in widow-
hood? How admirably does St. Jerome speak of
his dear daughter Paula, in the midst of so many
oppositions, in the midst of such a variety of acci-
dents? What is there that we might not do after
such excellent patterns ? They were what we are ;
they served the same God, and practised the same
virtues ; why, then, should not we do as much,
according to our condition and vocation, to pre-
serve our resolution and holy protestation?


:>*K<


CHAPTER XIII.

"HE FOURTH CONSIDERATION. — THE LOVE THAT JESUS CHRIST
BEARS US.

gpONSIDER the incomparable love with which
*& Jesus Christ our Lord has suffered so much
in this world, but especially in the Garden of
Olives and upon Mount Calvary, for your sake.
By all these pains and sufferings he obtained of
God the Father good resolutions and protestations
for your heart ; and by the same means he also
obtained whatever is necessary to maintain,
nourish, strengthen, and fulfil them. O resolu-
tion, how precious art thou, being the daughter of
such a mother, as is the passion of my Saviour !
Oh, how tenderly ought my soul to cherish thee,
sincethouhastbeensodeartoinysweetJesus ! Alas,


THE LOVE THAT JESUS CHRIST BEARS US. 355

0 Saviour of my soul ! thou didst die to purchase
for me these resolutions. Oh, grant me the grace
rather to suffer death than to lose them !

Observe, my Philothea, it is certain that the
heart of Jesus beheld your heart from the tree of
the cross, and, by the love which he bore towards
it, obtained for it all the good you shall ever have,
and among the rest your resolutions. Yes, Phil-
othea, we may all say, with the prophet Jeremias :
"O Lord, before I had a being thou didst behold
me, and called me by my name" ; since the divine
goodness did actually prepare for us all the general
and particular means of salvation, and consequent-
ly our good resolutions. As a pregnant woman
prepares the cradle, the linen, and swathing-
clothes, and even a nurse for the child which she
hopes to bring forth, although it is not yet in the
world ; so our Saviour, who designed to bring you
forth to salvation, and make you his child, pre-
pared all that was necessary for you upon the
tree of the cross : your spiritual cradle, your linen,
and swathing-clothes, your nurse, and all that was
necessary for your happiness. Such are all those
graces by which he seeks to attract your soul and
bring it to perfection.

Ah, my God! how deeply ought we to imprint
this thy love in our memory ! Is it possible that

1 could have been so tenderly beloved by my
Saviour as that he should think of me in particular
even in all these little occurrences, by which he
has drawn me to himself ? How much, then, ought
we to love, cherish, and convert them all to our
own profit ! O consoling reflection ! the amiable


356 A DEVOUl LIFE.

heart of God has thought of Philothea, loved hex,
and procured her a thousand means of salvation, even
as many as if there had been no other souls in the
world to think of. As the sun shining upon one
place of the earth enlightens it no less than if it
shined on no other, so in the very same manner is our
Lord solicitous for all his dear children, thinking
on each of them as though he had forgotten the
rest. "He loved me," says St. Paul, "and deliv-
ered himself for me." He says for me alone, as if
he had done nothing for the rest. O Philothea!
let this sacred truth be imprinted in your soul, in
order to cherish and nourish your resolution, which
has been so precious to the heart of our Saviour,


>>*&


CHAPTER XIV.

THE FIFTH CONSIDERATION. —THE ETERNAL LOVE OF GOD TOWARDS

US.

||£ONSIDER the eternal love which God has
^) borne towards you : for, before our Lord Jesus
Christ, as man, suffered on the cross for you, his
divine Majesty, by his omniscience, already foresaw
your being, and loved you exceedingly. But
when did his love for you begin ? Even when he
began to be God. But when did he begin to be
God? Never, for he has always been without a
beginning or end, so also has he always loved you
from all eternity, and in consequence of this love


AFFECTIONS OF OUR SENTIMENTS. 357

he has prepared for you these graces and favors.
Hence, speaking to you as well as others, by the
prophet Jeremias, he says, "I have loved thee
with an everlasting love, therefore have I drawn
thee, taking pity on thee"; and amongst othei
things he caused you to make firm resolutions to
serve him.

O God ! what resolutions are these on which
thou hast thought and meditated from all eternity !
Ah, how dear and precious should they be to us !
What ought we not to suffer, rather than forget
the least of them ! Though the whole world should
be destroyed in consequence, yet we must observe
them faithfully ; for the whole world is not worth
one soul, and a soul is worth nothing without these
resolutions.


CHAPTER XV.

GENERAL AFFECTIONS ON THE PRECEDING CONSIDERATIONS, AND A
CONCLUSION OF THESE EXERCISES.

tf^jg DEAR resolutions ! fair tree of life, which
^#> God, with his own hand has planted in the
midst of my heart, and which my Saviour desires to
water with his blood to make thee fruitful : I will
rather endure a thousand deaths than suffer any
wind of prosperity or adversity to pluck thee up.
No; neither vanity, delights, riches, nor tribula-
tions, shall ever withdraw me from my design.
Alas ! O Lord, it is thou thyself that hast


358 A DEVOUT LIFE.

planted and eternally preserved in thy father}/
bosom this fair tree for the garden of my heart.
Alas ! how many souls are there who have not
been favored in this manner ; and how, then, can I
ever sufficiently humble myself beneath thy
mercy ?

O fair and holy resolutions ! if I preserve yon
you will preserve me ; if you live in my soul, my
soul will live in you. Live, then, forever, O reso-
lutions, which are eternal in the mercy of God ;
live eternally in me, and let me never forsake
you!

After these affections you must consider the
particular means necessary to maintain these
cherished resolutions, and determine to be faithful
in making good use of them ; such as frequent
prayer, the sacraments, good works, the amend-
ment of your faults discovered in the examination,
retrenching the occasions of evil, and following the
counsels which shall be given you for this purpose.

Afterwards, by way of recruiting your strength,
make a thousand protestations that you will per-
severe in your resolutions ; and as if you held
your heart, soul, and will in your hands, dedicate,
consecrate, sacrifice, and immolate them to God,
protesting never to take them back again, but leave
them in the hand of his divine Majesty, to follow
on all occasions his holy ordinances.

Pray to God to renovate you entirely, and to
bless and strengthen this your protestation. In-
voke the blessed Virgin, your guardian angel, and
your holy patron.

In this disposition of heart go to your spiritual


SENTIMENTS AFTER THIS EXERCISE. 359

father, and accuse yourself of the principal faults
which you may have remarked since your general
confession, and, receiving absolution in the same
manner as the first time, pronounce and sign your
protestation before him; and, in conclusion, unite
your renovated heart to its first principle, your
Saviour, in the most holy sacrament of the Eu-
charist.

CHAPTER XVI.

OF OUR SENTIMENTS AFTER THIS EXERCISE.

5H^X the day on which you have made this reno-


slsfS vation, and the days immediately following,
you ought frequently to repeat from your heart
those inflamed words of St. Paul, St. Austin, St.
Catherine of Genoa, etc. : "Xo, I am no more my
own; whether I live, or whether I die, I am my
Saviour's. I have no longer anything of me or
mine ; my me is Jesus, and my mine is to be
wholly his. O world ! thou art always thyself,
and I have hitherto been always myself, but from
henceforth I will be myself no more." Xo, we
shall be no more ourselves, for we shall have our
heart changed, and the world which has so often
deceived us sliall be deceived in us ; for, perceiv-
ing our change only by degrees, it will think us
still Esaus, but we shall rind ourselves to be
Jacobs. All these exencis( s ought to remain fixed
in the heart, and wheD we finish our consideration


360 A DEVOUT LIFE.

and meditation we must turn gently ana quietly
towards our ordinary affairs and conversations, lest
the precious liquor of our resolutions should be
suddenly spilt ; for it must penetrate through all
parts of the soul, without, however, any effort of
mind or body.


CHAPTER XVII.

AN ANSWER TO TWO OBJECTIONS WHICH MAY BE MADE
TO THIS INTRODUCTION.

TJYHE world will perhaps tell you, Philothea, that
<^s these exercises and advices are so numerous,
that he who would practise them must apply him-
self to nothing else. Alas ! Philothea, should we
do nothing else, we should do enough, since we
should do all that we ought to do in this world.
But do not }'ou perceive the delusion? If they
were all to be necessarily performed every day,
they would then, indeed, constitute our whole oc-
cupation ; but it is not requisite to perform them
otherwise than in their proper time and place, as
occasions may present themselves. How many
civil laws and regulations there are which must be
observed, but it is universally understood that they
are to be executed on proper occasions, and no one
imagines that they are all to be put in force every
day. David was a king charged with the most
difficult affairs, yet he performed many more exer-
cises than I have prescribed to you. St. Lewis


AN ANSWER TO TWO OBJECTIONS. 361

was a prince admirable both in war and peace, and
one who administered justice, and managed his
affairs with the most assiduous attention, yet he
heard two masses every day, said vespers and
compline with his chaplain, made his meditation,
risited hospitals every Friday, confessed and took
the discipline, heard sermons frequently, and held
very often spiritual conferences ; yet, notwith-
standing all this, he never saw an occasion of pro-
moting the public good which he did not improve,
and diligently put in execution ; and his court was
more splendid and nourishing than it had ever
been in the time of his predecessors. Perform,
then, these exercises as I have marked them out
for you, and God will give you sufficient leisure
and strength to perform all your other duties,
although he should make the sun stand still for
you, as he did for Josue. We always do enough
when God works with us.

The world wrill perhaps say that I suppose,
almost throughout the whole work, that Philo-
fchea has the gift of mental prayer ; and yet
every one has it not ; so that this introduction
will not serve for all. It is true J have made
this supposition ; it is also true that every one
has not this gift ; but it is no less true that al-
most all, even the most ignorant, may have it,
provided they have good guides, and are will-
ing to take as much pains to obtain it as it de-
serves. But, should there be some who have
not this gift in any degree whatever, which I
think almost impossible, a prudent spiritual di-
rector will easily supply that defect, by teaching


362 A DEVOUT LIFE.

them to read, or to hear others read, the consdi-
erations included in the meditations with profound
and close attention.


CHAPTER XVIII.

THE THREE LAST AND PRINCIPAL ADVICES FOR THIS INTRODUCTION.

'J0MS the first day of every month repeat, after
™&> your meditations, the protestation inserted in
the first part, p. 50 ; and at all times protest that
you are determined to observe it ; saying, with
David, "No, my God, thy justifications I will
never forget, for by them thou hast given me
life." Ps. cxviii. When you feel any disorder
in your soul take your protestation in hand, and,
prostrate in the spirit of humility, recite it with
}^our whole heart, and you will find great ease
and comfort.

Make an open confession, not of being devout,
but of desiring to become devout. Be no\
ashamed to practise those necessary actions
which conduct the soul to the love of God. Ac-
knowledge frankly that you would rather die
than commit a mortal sin ; that you are resolved
to frequent the sacraments, and to follow the
counsels of your director, though sometimes it
may not be necessary to name him ; for this
candid profession of our desire to serve God,
end of consecrating ourselves entirely to his love,


PRINCIPAL ADVICES. 363

is very acceptable to his divine Majesty, who
commands us not to be ashamed either of him or
of his cross. Besides, it presents many proposals
and invitations which the world might make to
draw us into the contrary way, and oblige us in
honor to act according to what we profess. As
the philosophers professed themselves philoso-
phers, that they might be suffered to live like
philosophers ; so we must profess ourselves to
be desirous of devotion, that we may be suffered
to live devoutly. If any one tell you that you
may live devoutly without practising these ad-
vices and exercises, answer him mildly, that,
your weakness being so great, you stand in need
of more help and assistance than others.

In line, my dearest Philothea, I conjuie you
by all that is sacred in heaven and on earth, by
the baptism which you have received, by the
breasts with which Jesus Christ was nourished, by
the charity with whicn ne loved you, and by
the bowels of that mercy in which you hope,
conllnue to persevere in this blessed enterprise
of a devout life, Our days glide away, and
death is at the gate. " The trumpet sounds re-
treat," says St, Gregory Xazianzen ; "let every
man be ready, for judgment is near." St. Syim
phoriaus mother, seeing him led to martyrdom,
cried after him, "My son ! remember eternal life,
look up to heaven, and think upon him who
reigns there ; your approaching en it will quickly
terminate the short career of this life." My Phi-
lothea, I also will say to you. Look up to heaven,
and do not forfeit it for this despicable earth t


364 A DEVOUT LIFE.

look down into hell, and do not cast yourself
into it for transitory joys ; look at Jesus Christ,
and do not renounce him for the world ; and,
when the labors of a devout life seem painful to
you, sing with St. Francis : —

" How sweet are all those momentary toils,
Which lead to never-ending heavenly joy ! "

Live Jesus ! to whom, with the Father and
Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and
throughout the endless ages of eternity. — Amen.


ETND«


A CONFERENCE

SETWEEN AN EMINENT DIVINE OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY
AND A POOR BEGGAR, ON THE MEANS OF ATTAINING TO CHRIS-
TIAN PERFECTION. TRANSLATED FROM THE WORKS OF J. THAU-
LERlUS, D.D., PRINTED AT PARIS, 1623. p. 833.

•JTTHERE was a great divine who prayed, for the
d*p space of eight years, that God would vouch-
safe to direct him to a man who might show him
the way of truth. Xow it happened, on a certain
day, whilst he found his soul excited to offer this
petition with a more than ordinary fervor, he heard
a voice from Heaven, which said to him, K Go out
to the church porch, and there thou shalt meet
with a man who will teach thee the way of truth."
On going thither he found a poor beggar, whose
feet were covered with sures, dirt, and mire, and
all the clothes on his back not worth three far-
things. Having courteously saluted him, he wished
him a good morning. To which the beggar re-
plied, " I never remember to have had a bad morn-
ing."— "God prosper you," said the doctor.
"What say you? "said the beggar; "I never was
otherwise than prosperous." — "I wish you all
happiness," replied the doctor; "but what do you
mean by speaking in this manner?" — "Why,"
said the poor man, "I never was unhappy." —
" God bless you," said the doctor ; " explain your-
self, for I cannot well understand your meaning."
The poor man answered, "That I shall do very


366 A DEVOUT LIFE.

willingly. You wished me, master doctor, a good
morning ; and I answered that I never had a had
morning ; for if I am hungry I praise God ; if I
suffer cold I praise God ; if it hail, snow, or rain,
if the weather be fair 01 foul, I give praise to
God ; if I am miserable and despised by all the
world, I still give praise to God ; and therefore I
never met with a bad morning. You also prayed
that God would prosper me ; to which I answered.,
chat I never was otherwise than prosperous ; for,
having learned to live with God, I know for
certain that all he does must necessarily be for
the best ; and therefore whatever happens to me
by his will, or his permission, whether it be
pleasant or disagreeable, sweet or bitter,! always
receive with joy, as coming from his merciful hand,
for the best ; and therefore I never was otherwise
than prosperous. You wished me also all happi-
ness ; and I, in like manner, replied, that I had
never been unhappy ; for I have resolved to adhere
to the divine will alone, and have so absolutely
relinquished self-will as to will always whatever
God wills, and therefore I was never unhappy;
for I never desire to have any other will than his,
and therefore I resign my will entirely to him."
" But what would you say," said the doctor, " if it
should be the will of this Lord of majesty to cast
you down into the bottomless pit?"— " How," said
he, hastily, " cast me down into the bottomless pit !
Why, if he should really do so, I have two arms, —
the one of true humility, by which I am united to
his most sacred humanity, which I place under
him ; the other, which is my right arm of love, bv


A CONFERENCE. 367

which I am united to his divinity ; and with both
I would embrace him so closely, and hold him so
firmly, that he would be obliged to go down with
me ; and I would much rather choose to be, even
jn hell, with God, than in heaven without hiin."
From this discourse the doctor learned that true
resignation, accompanied with profound humility,
is the shortest way to God. Having afterwards
asked the beggar, whence he came, he answered,
r From God." — "But where," said the doctor,
rtdid you find God?" — "I found him," said he,
"where I forsook all creatures." — "And where or
with whom did you leave God?" said the doctor.
*rI left him," said he, "with the clean of heart,
and amongst men of good will." — "But I pray
thee tell me who, or what, art thou." — "I am a
king," replied he. The doctor further asking him
where his kingdom was, he replied, " My king-
dom is in my soul ; for I can govern both my
exterior and interior senses so absolutely that all
the affections and forces of my soul are in perfect
subjection to me ; which kingdom is doubtless
more excellent than all the kingdoms of this
world." The doctor asked him how he had at-
tained to this perfection. He answered, "By
silence, meditation, and by tending always to an
union with God ; for I could never rest," said he,
" in anything less than God ; and now, having found
him, I enjoy peace and everlasting rest."


This book is due at the WALTER R. DAVIS LIBRARY on
the last date stamped under "Date Due." If not on hold, it may
be renewed by bringing it to the library.


°£}| RETURNED

d'JJI returned

FEB o *

9Pnn

1 LU \j £>

&>U8

MAY 10

tm

-■

-

-"- z

JUN o l ;

'OH)

Olu . i

.

■'

DEC 1 i

♦ m'

1 '

!AN {J 'i i\

'/

Form No 513,
Rev. 1/84
