Internet History Sourcebooks: Medieval Sourcebook













       Home  |  Ancient  History Sourcebook  |  Medieval Sourcebook  |   Modern History Sourcebook  |  Byzantine  Studies Page
      Other History Sourcebooks:  African  |  East Asian  |  Indian  |  Islamic  |  Jewish  |   Lesbian and Gay  |  Science  |  Women's  |  Global

			 IHSP
             Medieval History

 Selected Sources
 Full Text Sources
 Saints' Lives
 Law Texts
 Maps
 Medieval Films
 Search
 Help

 Selected Sources Sections
 Studying History
 End of Rome
 Byzantium
 Islam
 Roman Church
 Early Germans
 Anglo-Saxons
 Celtic World
 Carolingians
 10 C Collapse
 Economic Life
 Crusades
 Empire & Papacy
 France
 England
 Celtic States
 Nordic Europe
 Iberia
 Italy
 Eastern Europe
 Intellectual Life
 Medieval Church
 Jewish Life
 Social History
 Sex & Gender
 States & Society
 Renaissance
 Reformation
 Exploration

 IHSP Credits

           Athanasius of Alexandria:
            VITA S. ANTONI [Life of St. Antony] (written bwtween 356 and 362)
           [Text here is from Athanasius:  Select Works and Letters , Volume IV of NICENE AND
              POST-NICENE FATHERS, Series II, Philip Schaff and Henry Wace, editors. The pagination of
              this edition has been preserved here for citation purposes.]

           Modern Bibliography
           [from Charlotte Roueche's   [email protected]   page at KCL]
           Translations:
           H. Ellershaw, Life of Antony, Select Writings of Athanasius, Library of
            Nicene and post Nicene Fathers II.4 (New York 1924, repr. 1957), 195-221 [This text]
           J. B. McLaughlin, St. Anthony the Hermit (New York, 1924)
           R. T. Meyer, Ancient Christian Writers 10 (London 1950)
           Sr. M. E. Keenan, in Early Christian Biographies, ed. R. J. Deferrari, The
            Fathers of the Church 15 (Washington, 1952), 133-224
           R. C. Gregg, Classics of Western Spirituality (SPCK London 1980)
           C. White, translating the Latin version, Early Christian Lives (Penguin, 1998), 1-70
           Discussions
           B. R. Brennan, 'Dating Athanasius' Vita Antonii' Vig. Christ. 30 (1976)
            52-4
           id. 'Athanasius' Vita Antonii. A sociological interpretation', Vig. Christ.
            39 (1985) 209-27
           A. Williams, 'The life of Antony and the domestication of charismatic wisdom',
            in Charisma and sacred biography, Monograph of the Journal of the American Academy of
              Religion
           T. Barnes, 'Angel of Light or mystic initiate ? The problem of the Life of
            Antony', JThS 37 (1986) 353-68
           C. Mango, 'Diabolus Byzantinus', A.Cutler and S. Franklin edd., Homo
            Byzantinus, Dumbarton Oaks Papers 46 (1992), 215-223
           S. Rubenson, The Letters of St. Antony : monasticism and the making of a
            saint (Minneapolis, 1995)

              The Life of St. Antony is included in the present collection partly on account of
              the important influence it has exercised upon the development of the ascetic life in the
              Church, partly and more especially on the ground of its strong claim to rank as a work of
              Athanasius. If that claim were undisputed, no apology would be needed for its presence in
              this volume. If on the other hand its spurious and unhistorical character had been finally
              demonstrated, its insertion would be open to just objections. As it is, the question being
              still in dispute, although the balance of qualified opinion is on the side of the
              Athanasian authorship, it is well that the reader should have the work before him and
              judge for himself. To assist his judgment, it will be attempted in the following
              paragraphs to state the main reasons on either side. In doing so, I can honestly disclaim
              any bias for or against the Vita, or monasticism. Monasticism, with all its good and evil,
              is a great outgrowth of human life and instinct, a great fact in the history of the
              Christian religion; and whether its origin is to be put fifty years earlier or later (for
              that is the net value of the question at issue) is a somewhat small point relatively to
              the great problems which it offers to the theologian, the historian, and the moralist. But
              the point is at any rate worthy of careful and dispassionate examination. In attempting
              this, while holding no brief for either side, I may as well at once state my opinion on
              the evidence, namely that, genuine as are many of the difficulties which surround the
              question, the external evidence for the Vita is too strong to allow us to set it aside as
              spurious, and that in view of that evidence the attempts to give a positive account of the
              book as a spurious composition have failed.
             1. BIBLIOGRAPHY. a. Sources. The only reference to Antony in other writings of
              Athanasius is in Hist. Ar. 14. See also Fest. Index x. Vita Pachomii in Act. SS. Mai.,
              Tom. iii. Appx. (written late in the fourth century, but by a person who had known
              Pachomius). Coptic fragments and documents (for early history of Egyptian monasticism with
              occasional details about Antony) in Zoega, Catalogus codd. Copticorum, (Rome, 1810),
              Mingarelli, Codd. copticorum reliquioe, (Bologna, 1785), Revillout, Rapport sur une
              mission, etc. (in Archives des Missions scientifiques a litteraires, 3,eserie, 1879, vol.
              4), Amielineau, Hist. de S. Pakhome, &c. (Annales du Musee Guimet, vol. xvii. Paris,
              1889).
              b. Modern discussions. Since the Reformation the general tendency of protestant
              writers has been to discredit, of Roman Catholics to maintain the authority of the Vita.
              To the former class belong the Magdeburg Centuriators, Rivet, Basnage, Casimir Oudin; to
              the latter, Bellarmin, Noel Alexandre, and above all Montfaucon in the Benedictine edition
              of Athanasius (especially in the Vita Athanasii, Animadversio II. in Vitam et Scripta
              S.A., and the Monitum in Antonii Vitam, which latter may still claim the first rank in
              critical discussions of the problem). We may add, as more or less unbiassed defenders of
              the Vita, Cave (Hist. Lit. i. 193), and Tillemont (Mem. vol. vii.). All the above belong
              to the period before 1750. In more recent times the attack has been led by Weingarten
              (Ursprung des Monchtums in nachkonst. zeitalter, reprinted in 1877 from Zeitschrift fur
              K.G. 1876, and in Herzog, vol. x. pp. 758 sqq.), followed by Gass (in Ztsch. K.G. II.
              274), and Gwatkin (Studies, &c. pp. 98--103). Israel, in Zeitsch. Wiss. Theol. 1880,
              p. 130, &c., characterises Weingarten's attack on the Vita as 'too bold.' Keim (Aus
              dem Urchr. 207 sqq.) and Hilgenfeld (in Zeitsch. f. Wiss. Theol. 1878) put the book in the
              lifetime of Ath. without absolutely pronouncing for him as the author, while Hase (J.
              Prot. Th. 1880), Harnack (especially in Th. Ltz. xi. 391,
             189
             see also 'Das Monchtum' u.s.w., Giessen, 1886), Moller, Lehrb. der K.G. i. 372, and
              Eichhorn ('Athanasii de vita ascetica testimania,' Halle, 1886, the most convincing
              discussion of recent date, and indispensable) decide without hesitation in its favour. The
              discussion of Bornemann (In investigando monachatus origine, quibus de causis ratio
              habenda sit Origenis, Leipzig, 1885) may also be mentioned as bearing on the general
              subject; also the articles 'Monastery,' 'Coenobium,' and 'Hermits' in D.C.A. The article
              'Antony' in D.C.B. passes over the question without discussion, excepting the trite, but
              untenable, statement that the Vita 'is probably in interpolated.' Farrar (Lives of the
              Fathers, and Contemp. Review, Nov. 1887) follows Gwatkin. Picturesque representations of
              Antony (from the Vita) in Kingsley's Hermits and Newman's Historical Sketches, vol. 2.
             2. EXTERNAL EVIDENCE AS TO AUTHORSHIP AND DATE. This is given by Montfaucon in the
              Monitum and reproduced by Eichhorn, pp. 36 sqq.
             i. The Version of Evagrius. Evagrius, presbyter (Eustathian) and subsequently (388)
              Bishop at Antioch (in Italy 364--373), translated the Vita Antanii into Latin. He prefaced
              with a short apology (see below, Vit. Ant. 1, note 1) for the freedom of his rendering,
              addressed 'Innocentio carissimo filio.' Now this Innocent, the friend of Jerome and
              Evagrius, died in the summer of 374, almost exactly a year after the death of Athanasius
              (D.C.B. iii. 3 251). Of this identification there is no reason to doubt; still less ground
              is there for the hesitation (Hist. Lit. 1. 283, 'non una est dubitandi ratio') of Cave and
              others as to the identity of the version, printed by Montfaucon and transmitted by very
              numerous MSS. ('quae ingenti numero vidi,' Migne xxv. p. clviii.) with that actually made
              by Evagrius. Therefore, even if we make the two very improbable assumptions that the
              Dedication to Innocentius falls within a few weeks or days of his death (i.e. during the
              journey from Italy to Syria!), and that the Vita was translated by Evagrius almost
              immediately upon its composition, the composition of the Vita falls within a few months of
              the death of Athanasius. Its antiquity then 'is fully conceded' even by Mr. Gwatkin
              (Studies, p. 103, who yet, p. 98, puts it down to 'the generation after Athanasius!'). The
              translation of Evagrius also preserves what looks like the original heading It should be
              added that the Evagrian version (read in the light of its preface), entirely excludes the
              hypothesis that the Greek text of the Vita is interpolated.Evagrius avowedly abridges at
              times, while in some cases he embellishes (see 82, note
             ii. Jerome wrote his Vita Pauli in the Syrian desert, between 374 and 379. He mentions
              both the Vita and its Latin Version in the prologue: if he had seen the latter he can
              scarcely have been ignorant of its heading. The non-mention of Athanasius as the author is
              an argumentum ex silentio of the most precarious kind. Some fifteen years later (de Script
              Eccles. 87, 88, 125) he repeatedly mentions Athanasius as the author, and specifies
              Evagrius as the translator.
             iii. Ephrem the Syrian (Opp. ed. 1732--43, 1. p. 249) quotes 'Saint' Athanasius by name
              as the biographer of Antony. Ephrem died in 373. But little stress can be laid upon this
              testimony, in view of the lack of a critical sifting of the works which bear the name of
              this saint (so Tillemont viii. 229, and vii. 138). More important is
             iv. Gregory Naz. Or. 21, 'Athanasius compiled the biography of the divine Antony

                 tou
                 monadikou
                  biou
                 nomoqesian
                 en
                 plasmti
                 dihghsews
                (cf Vita, Prologue). This oration was delivered in
                380, seven years after the death of Athanasius. Gregory, it is true, is not a good judge
                on a point of criticism. But he expresses the opinion of his time, and confirms and is
                confirmed by the evidence of Evagrius and Jerome.
               v. Rufinus, Hist. Eccl. I. viii. He would give an account of Antony, but 'ille libellus
                exclusit qui ab Athanasio scriptus etiam Latino Sermone editus est.' This was written 400
                A.D.: if in a later work (Hist. Mon. 30, and see also 29) he happens to allude to the Vita
                without mentioning its author, we are not entitled to say that to Rufinus 'the work is
              anonymous' (Gwatkin, p. 103).
               vi. The Life of Pachomius, which (as above mentioned) has details of Antony's life
                independent of the Vita, also mentions the latter (c. 1) as the work of Athanasius. Though
                written perhaps as late as 390, this document is of great weight as evidence in the case
              (see Kroger in Theol. Ltzg. 1890, p. 620).
               vii. Paulinus in his prologue to the Life of Ambrose (after 400) refers to the Vita as
              written by Athanasius.
               viii. Fifth-century historians, Palladius, Hist. Laus. 8, Socrates (H. E., i. 21)
                Sozomenus (i. 13) attest the established tradition of their day at Athanasius was the
              author of the Life.
               190
               ix. Augustine (Conf. viii. 14, 15, 19, 29) and Chrysostom (Hom. 8 on S. Matthew)
                mention the Vita without giving the name of the author. But we are not entitled to cite
              them as witnesses to its (alleged) anonymity, which they neither affirm nor imply.
               The above witnesses, all of whom excepting No. viii. come within 50 years of the death
                of Athanasius, are a formidable array. No other work of Athanasius can boast of such
                external evidence in its favour. And in the face of such evidence it is impossible to
                place the composition later than the lifetime of the great Bishop. We have therefore to
                ask whether the contents of the Vita are in irreconcileable conflict with the result of
                the external evidence: whether they point, not indeed to a later age, for the external
                evidence excludes this, but to an author who during the lifetime of Athanasius (i.e. not
                later than the year of his death) ventured to publish a hagiographic romance in his name
              ('Evagrian' heading, and 71, 82).
               3. Internal Evidence. It may be remarked in limine that for the existence of Antony
                there is not only the evidence of the Vita itself, but also that of many other
                fourth-century documents (see above 1. a. under 'sources'). Weingarten quite admits this
                (R.E., X. 774, but he implies the contrary in his Zeiltafein, ed. 3, P. 228); and Mr.
                Gwatkin is certainly far ahead of his evidence when he pronounces (Arian Controversy, p.
              48) that Antony 'never existed.'
               a. Origin and early history of Monasticism. According to the Vita, the desert was
                unknown to
                 monacoi
                (solitary ascetics) at the time (about 275? Vit. 3) when Antony first
                adopted the ascetic life. About the year 285 he began his twenty years' sojourn in the
                ruined fort. To the end of this sojourn belongs the first great wave of Monastic
                settlement in the desert. During the later part of the great persecution 'monasteries' and
                monks begin to abound ( 44, 46). The remainder of his long life (311--356) is passed
                mainly in his 'inner mountain,' where he forms the head and centre of Egyptian
                monasticism. Now it is contended by Weingarten and his followers that the Vita is
                contradicted in this important particular by all the real evidence as to the origin of
                monasticism, which cannot be proved to have originated before the death of Constantine.
                But Eichhorn has I think conclusively shewn the hastiness of this assumption. Passing over
                the disputable evidence of the De Vita Contemplativa ascribed to Philo, (which Weingarten
                endeavours, against Lucius and others, to put back to a date much earlier than the third
                century and out of relation to Christian asceticism(1)), the writings of Athanasius
              himself are the sufficient refutation of the late date assigned to the rise of monachism.
               In the writings of the supposed date (356--362) of the Vita, references to monks are
                very frequent (e.g. Apol. Fug. 4, Apol. Const. 29): but previous to this (339) we find
                them mentioned in Encyl. 3, and yet earlier, Apol. Ar. 67 (see below). In the letter to
                Dracontius (Letter 49 in this vol.), corporate monasticism is implied to be no novel
                institution. Dracontius himself (about 354) is president of a monastery, and many other
                similar communities are referred to. (Gwatkin deals with this letter in an unsatisfactory
                fashion, p. 102, see the letter itself, 7, 9, and notes.) The letter to Amun, probably
                earlier than that just mentioned, is clearly (sub. fin.) addressed to the head of a
                monastic society. Again, the bishops Muis and Paulus of Letter 49, 7, who were monks
                before their consecration, had been in the monastery of Tabennae before the death of
                Pachomius, which occurred almost certainly in 346 (Eichhorn 12, 13. The whole history of
                Pachomius, who was only a year or two older than Athanasius, although personally but
                little known to him, his monastery being at Tabennae, an island near Philae, is in
                conflict with Weingarten's theory). Lastly(2) one of the most characteristic and life-like
                of the documents relating to the case of Arsenius and the Council of Tyre, namely the
                letter of Pinnes to John Arcaph (Apol. Ar. 67) carries back the evidence earlier still.
                Pinnes is 'presbyter of a monastery' (
                 monh
                ): that
                 monh
                here means a society of monks, and
                not a posting station (Weing. in R. E.,X. p. 775) is clear from the mention of 'Helias the
                monk,' and 'I, Paphnutius, monk of the same monastery.' This letter proves that there were
                not only Catholic but Meletian monks, and these not hermits but in societies: and thus the
                origin of the solitary type of monasticism goes back as far as the Meletian schism. (The
                existence of Meletian monks is attested independently of this letter, see Eich. p. 347.)
                Weingarten is quite unable to deal with this obstacle to his theory. His argument is
                simply this: either the letter has nothing to do with monks and monasteries (he overlooks
              Paphnutius),
               191
               or it must be rejected as spurious! What reductio ad absurdum could be more complete?
                In an equally desperate way he deals with the clear evidence of Aphraates, Hom. vi., as to
                the existence of (at any rate) solitary monasticism in Eastern Syria as early as 336. See
              Texte und Untersuchungen iii. 3, pp. xvi. 89, &c. (Leipzig, 1888.)
               b. Historical misstatements. i. It is better to include under this head rather than
                under the last the title ad peregrinos fratres. Who were the 'foreign monks' (
                 tous
                 en
                 th
                 xenh
                  monacous
                )? The introduction of monasticism into the West seems to belong to the time of S.
                Ambrose (Aug. Conf. viii. 6, cf. Sozom. III. 14, 'the European nations [before 361] had no
                experience of monastic societies') or rather Martin of Tours (D.C.B. iii. p. 840). The
                statement (Encycl. Brit. 'Monachism') that Athanasius carried the Vita antonii to Rome in
                340 is based on a misunderstanding of Jerome (Ep. 127), who really says no more than that
                the existence of monachism in Egypt first became known at Rome from the visits of
                Athanasius and of his successor Peter. If then the 'peregrini fratres' are to be looked
                for in the West, we have a serious difficulty, and must choose between the Vita and
                Sozomen. But the foreign monks may have belonged to the East. (I cannot see that 93
                'assumes,' as Mr. Gwatkin maintains, 'the existence of numerous monks in the West.' What
                is said is simply that Antony had been heard of---
                 hkousqh
                ---in Spain, Gaul, and Africa.)
              However, the point must be left uncertain, and so far allowed to weigh against the Vita.
               ii. Early intercourse of Athanasius with Antony (Prologue, and note 2). If the
                Benedictine text is correct, the reference must be to the period before Athanasius became
                deacon to Bishop Alexander, in fact to a period previous to 318 A.D. Tillemont (viii.
                652), who maintains the other reading, mainly relies upon the impossibility of finding
                room for the intercourse in question in the early life of Athanasius. But his only source
                of knowledge of that period is Rufinus, a very poor authority, and Montfaucon replies with
                some force (Animadv. 11) that we have no sufficient information as to how Athanasius
                passed the years previous to his ordination by Alexander. He also suggests that Athanasius
                may have been one of those who followed Antony's example ( 46, of. Apol. c. Ar. 6) after
                his first visit to Alexandria. I may add that the notes to the Vita will call attention to
                several points of contact between the teaching of Antony and the earliest treatises of
                Athanasius. Yet the impression left on the mind is here again one of uncertainty (cf.
              Prolegg. ch. ii. 1 fin.).
               iii. The narrative about Duke Balacius ( 86: see note there) is another genuine
                difficulty, only to be got over if we suppose either that Athanasius in one place tells
                the story inaccurately, and corrects himself in the other, or that the Hist. Arian. was
              partly written for Athanasius by a secretary.
               iv. Supposed learning of Antony. His ignorance of letters and of the Greek language
                does not prevent his forcibly employing the most effective arguments against Arianism
                (69), vindicating the Incarnation (74) much in the manner of Athanasius, and above all
                showing a fair acquaintance (72--74) with Platonic philosophy (see notes there). But
                everything in the biography points to a man of robust mind, retentive memory(3) and
                frequent intercourse with visitors. If he were so, he can scarcely have been ignorant of
                the theological controversies of his day, or of the current philosophical ideas. Nor can I
                see that the philosophy of his argument against the Greeks goes beyond what that would
                imply. His allusion to Plato does not look like a first-hand citation. And even an
                Athanasius would not so entirely rise out of the biographical habits of his day as to
                mingle nothing of his own with the speeches of his hero ('Equidem quid Antonio quid
              Athanasio tribuendum sit uix diiudicari posse concedo,' Eich. p. 52).
               c. Inconsistencies with Athanasius. It is the most serious objection to the Athanasian
                authorship of the Vita that Athanasius (with the exception of the 'antilegomenon' Hist.
                Ar. 14) nowhere else mentions Antony by name. Especially in the letter to Dracontius, who
                at first refused the Episcopate in the supposed interests of his soul, we might, it is
                argued, have expected a reference to the deep reverence of Antony ( 67) for even the
                lowest clergy (the persons enumerated, Letter 49, 7, are bishops who had previously been
                monks, and have nothing to do with this question). That is true. We might have expected
                it. But as a matter of fact Athanasius uses another argument instead (see Letter 49, 3,
                note 8 (a)). It does not follow that he did not know of the Antony of the Vita. But
                although the letter in question has been pressed unduly, the general objection, as an
                argumentum ex silentio on a rather large scale, remains(3). Some more detailed points must
              now be considered.
               192
               a. Demons and Miracles The writings of Athanasius are singularly free from the tendency
                to indulge in the marvellous. The death of Arius he regards as a judgment, and relates it
                with a certain awe-struck sobriety. The
                 Fhmh
                of Julian's death in the Narrat. ad Ammon.
                comes less under the head of ecclesiastical miracle than under that of
                 qeia
                 twn
                 prhgwatwn
                (Herod. ix.100, cf. Grote v. 260 sq.); whereas the Vita swarms with miraculous and
                demoniacal stories, some (passed over in silence by Newman and other apologists for the
                Life) indescribably silly (e.g. 53, 63). Hence even Cave allows that the Vita contains
                things 'tanto viro indigna.' But it must be observed(1) that Antony disclaims, and his
                biographer disclaims for him, inherent miraculous power. His miracles are wrought by
                Christ in answer to prayer, and he prefers that those who desire his help should obtain
                what they want by praying for themselves (cf. also 49).(2) That again and again (esp.
                16--43) he insists on the absolute subjection of all evil powers to God, and their
                powerlessness to injure believers in Christ.(3) That Athanasius recognises
                 shmeia
                (in the
                sense of miracles, see Letter 49, 9, note 9) as a known phenomenon in the case both of
                bishops and of monks.(4) That his language about demons and the power of the sign of the
                Cross in dispersing them is quite of a piece with what is related in the Vita (see notes
                passim).(5) On the clairvoyance of Antony, and one or two kindred matters which offer
                points of contact with phenomena that have been recently the subject of careful research,
                notes will be found below giving modern references. On the whole, one could wish that
                Athanasius, who is in so many ways surprisingly in touch with the modern mind (supra,
                introd. to de Incar and Prolegg. ch. iv. 2 d and 3), had not written a biography revealing
                such large credulity. But we must measure this credulity of his not by the evidential
                methods of our own day, but by those of his own. If we compare the Vita, not with our
                modern biographies but with those, say, of Paul and Hilarion by Jerome, its superiority is
                striking (this is pointed out by W. Israel in Zeitschr fur Wiss. Theol. 1878, pp. 130,
                137, 145, 153). For myself I should certainly prefer to believe that Athanasius had not
                written many things in the Vita: but I would far rather he had written them all than the
              one passage Hist. Ar. 38 fin.

   b
                . Theology. That there should be certain characteristic differences from the theology
                of Athanasius is what one would expect in an account of Antony that bore any relation to
                the historical person. Such is the anthropomorphic tendency, shewn especially in the
                corporeal nature ascribed to demons. Such perhaps is a tinge of naive semi-pelagianism
                about the Hermit's language ( 20 and elsewhere); we cannot forget the connection of
                Cassian's Collations with Egyptian monasticism. Once again, 'Antony's shame of the body is
                not in the spirit of the writer ad Amunem' (Gwatkin, Studies, p. 102). Lastly, in Antony's
                account of the heathen gods ( 76) we miss the characteristic Euhemerism of Athanasius (see
                supra, pp. 10, 62, &c.). Throughout, in fact, the ruder monastic instinct crops up
                  from under the Athanasian style and thought of the biographer. But the latter is also
                  unmistakable (see the notes passim), and the differences have been certainly made too much
                  of. I will give one example from Mr. Gwatkin, who says (ubi supra), 'Athanasius does not
                  speak of
                 pronoia
                like the Vita (c. 49, 66, 74), for de Fuga 25 specially refers to his
                providential escape from Syrianus, and c. Gent. 47,
                 pronnoia
                 tpn
                 pa?twn
                is very
                incidental.' Now certainly the constant introduction of
                 pronoia
                , which Mr. Gwatkin has
                understated, is a marked feature of the Vita. But I am not prepared to say that Athanasius
                could not speak in this way. The word is common, and even characteristic, in his writings.
                A few examples will support this statement; more will be referred to in the index to this
                volume. De Incarn. 2. 1.
                 thn
                 tpn
                 olwn
                 pronoian
                 kaq
                 eautpn
                 ouk
                 einai
                 moqologousin
              .
               14Â· 6.
                 tou
                 dia
                 tha
                 idias
                 pronoias
                ....
                 didaskontos
                 peri
                 tos
                 patros
              .
               15.
                 b?epontes
                ....
                 panta
                 taxei
                 kai
                 pronaia
                 kinoumena

               Apol. Fug. 17.
                 emele
                 gar
                 autois
                ..
                 mhte
                 thn
                 wrismenhn
                 para
                 ths
                II
                 ronoias
                 krisn
                 prolambanein
                (and so in 9, 16, 22, 25 of this short tract). Orat. iii. 37. 'o II
                 athr
                 en
                 Yip
                 tpn
                 pantmn
                 pronoian
                  poieitai

               If each one of these and numberless other references to Providence is 'very
                incidental,' those in the Vita may surely claim the benefit (whatever that may be) of the
              same formula.
               The above are the principal materials for a decision as to the genuineness of the Vita:
                and I do not see how they can justify any opinion but that stated at the outset. Against
                the Vita we have certain historical difficulties (intercourse with Athanasius, peregrini
                fratres, Balacius), and arguments ex silentio, a kind of evidence seldom conclusive. For
                it, we have a quite unusual array of external evidence, including an almost contemporary
                version, the absence of any room for its date at a safe distance from its traditional
                author, and the many points of contact, as well as the characteristic differences between
                the Vita and the writings of Athanasius. Moreover on the kindred question of the origin of
              monasticism, Weingarten's
               193
               theory breaks down, and leads him to suicidal steps in more than one direction.
                Although, therefore, it is permissible to keep an open mind on the subject, we must
                recognise that the enterprise of the recent assailants of the Vita is at present at a dead
              halt, that overwhelming probability is against them.
               But if Athanasius wrote the Vita, it does not follow that all its less edifying details
                are true, nor that its portraiture is free from subjectivity 4. At the same time, to the
                present writer at least, the lineaments of a genuine man,
                 omoiopaqous
                 hmin
                , stand out from
                the story. Doubtless there is idealisation, panegyric, an absence of sinfulness (Gwatkin,
                Studies, p. 100). But the moderate value set on miracles (38, 56), the absence of the
                element of fear from his religion (42, &c.), his serene courtesy (73) and uniform
                cheerfulness (67, 70), the caution against being tempted to excess in ascetic exercises
                (25), the ready half-humorous good sense (73, 85) of the man, are human touches which
                belong to flesh and blood, not to hagiographic imagination. But here the question is one
                of individual taste. At any rate the Vita embodies the best spirit of early monasticism.
                It was the pure desire to serve God and fulfil the spirit of the Gospel that led Antony to
                part with all that might make the world precious to him, and to betake himself to his long
                voluntary martyrdom of solitude, privation, and prayer. We see nothing but tenderness and
                love of men in his character, nothing of the fierce bloodthirsty fanaticism which in
                persons like Senuti made fifth-century monasticism a reproach to the Christian name. Had
                Antony lived in our time, he might have felt that the solitary life was a renunciation of
                the highest vocation of which man is capable, the ministry to the material and spiritual
                needs of others. But it is not given to man to see all aspects of truth at once and to our
              bustling, comfort-loving age, even the life of Antony has its lesson.
               The Vita has undoubtedly exercised a powerful and wide-spread influence. Upon it Jerome
                modelled his highly idealised tales of Paul and Hilarion; at Rome and all over the West it
                kindled the flame of monastic aspirations; it awoke in Augustine (Conf. Viii. ubi supra)
                the resolution to renounce the world and give himself wholly to God. The ingens numerus of
                Latin manuscripts, and the imitation of its details in countless monastic biographies,
                testify to its popularity in the middle ages. Like monasticism itself, its good influence
                was not without alloy; but on the whole we may claim for it that it tended to stimulate
              the nobler of the impulses which underlie the monastic life.
               A few words may be added on the evidence of the Vita as to the form and motive of early
                monachism. In the Life of Antony, the stages are(1) ascetics living in the towns and
                villages, not withdrawn from society ( 3, 4);(2) solitary monasticism in the desert, away
                from human society; and, as the fame of Antony increases,(3) the formation ( 44) of
                clusters of cells centering round some natural leader, the germ of the
                 laura
                (such as the
                community of Tabennae under Pachomius). Of organised monastic communities the Vita tells
                us nothing. With regard to the motive of the earliest monasticism, this has been variously
                sought in(1) the development of the ascetic element present in Christianity from the very
                first;(2) in the influence of the Alexandrian School, especially Origen, who again is
                influenced by the spirit of revolt against the body and detachment from the world which
                characterised neo-Platonism (see Bornemann's work mentioned above);(3) in the
                persecutions, which drove Christians to the desert (Eus. H. E. vi. 42), which some adopted
                as their home;(4) to the (not necessarily conscious) imitation of analogous heathen
                institutions, especially the societies of
                 agneuontes
                which were gathered round or in the
                temples of Serapis (Weingarten, R.E., X. 779--785. Revillout, p. 480 n, refers to Zoega,
                p. 542, for the fact that Pachomius himself was a monk of Serapis before his forced
                baptism by his Christian neighbours; and that after it he continued his ascetic life with
                no external difference.(5) To the desire to avoid civil obligations, already marked in the
                Rescript of Valens (Cod. Th. xii. 1. 63, quidam ignauiae sectatores desertis civitatum
                muneribus, &c.). Of the above motives the Vita gives no support to any but the first,
                which it directly confirms, and perhaps indirectly to the second. The date of the Vita
              depends mainly on the view to be taken of 82, where see note

               Athanasius: LIFE OF ANTONY
               The life and conversation of our holy Father, Antony: written and sent to the monks in
                foreign parts by our Father among the Saints, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria. Athanasius
              [1] the bishop to the brethren in foreign parts.
               You have entered upon a noble rivalry with the monks of Egypt by your determination
                either to equal or surpass them in your training in the way of virtue. For by this time
                there are monasteries among you, and the name of monk receives public recognition. With
                reason, therefore, all men will approve this determination, and in answer to your prayers
                God will give its fulfilment. Now since you asked me to give you an account of the blessed
                Antony's way of life, and are wishful to learn how he began the discipline, who and what
                manner of man he was previous to this, how he closed his life, and whether the things told
                of him are true, that you also may bring yourselves to imitate him, I very readily
                accepted your behest, for to me also the bare recollection of Antony is a great accession
                of help. And I know that you, when you have heard, apart from your admiration of the man,
                will be wishful to emulate his determination; seeing that for monks the life of Antony is
                a sufficient pattern of discipline. Wherefore do not refuse credence to what you have
                heard from those who brought tidings of him; but think rather that they have told you only
                a few things, for at all events they scarcely can have given Â· circumstances of so great
                import in any detail. And because I at your request have called to mind a few
                circumstances about him, and shall send as much as I can tell in a letter, do not neglect
                to question those who sail from here: for possibly when all have told their tale, the
                account will hardly be in proportion to his merits. On account of this I was desirous,
                when I received your letter, to send for certain of the monks, those especially who were
                wont to be more frequently with him, that if I could learn any fresh details I might send
                them to you. But since the season for sailing was coming to an end and the letter-carrier
                urgent, I hastened to write to your piety what I myself know, having seen him many times,
                and what I was able to learn from him, for I was his attendant for a long time, and poured
                water on his hands [2]; in all points being mindful of the truth, that no one should
                disbelieve through hearing too much, nor on the other hand by hearing too little should
              despise the man.
               I. Antony you must know was by descent an Egyptian: his parents were of good family and
                possessed considerable wealth [2a], and as they were Christians he also was reared in the
                same Faith. In infancy he was brought up with his parents, knowing nought else but them
                and his home. But when he was grown and arrived at boyhood, and was advancing in years, he
                could not endure to learn [2b] letters, not caring to associate with other boys; but all
                his desire was, as it is written of Jacob, to live a plain man at home [3]. With his
                parents he used to attend the Lord's House, and neither as a child was he idle nor when
                older did he despise them; but was both obedient to his father and mother and attentive to
                what was read, keeping in his heart what was profitable in what he heard. And though as a
              child brought up in moderate affluence, he did not trouble his parents for varied or
               196
               luxurious fare, nor was this a source of pleasure to him; but was content simply with
              what he found nor sought anything further.
               2. After the death of his father and mother he was left alone with one little sister:
                his age was about eighteen or twenty, and on him the care both of home and sister rested.
                Now it was not six months after the death of his parents, and going according to custom
                into the Lord's House, he communed with himself and reflected as he walked how the
                Apostles [4] left all and followed the Saviour; and how they in the Acts [5] sold their
                possessions and brought and laid them at the Apostles' feet for distribution to then eedy,
                and what and how great a hope was laid up for them in heaven. Pondering over these things
                he entered the church, and it happened the Gospel was being read, and he heard the Lord
                saying to the rich man [6], 'If thou wouldest be perfect, go and sell that thou hast and
                give to the poor; and come follow Me and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.' Antony, as
                though God had put him in mind of the Saints, and the passage had been read on his
                account, went out immediately from the church, and gave the possessions of his forefathers
                to the villagers--they were three hundred acres [7], productive and very fair --that they
                should be no more a clog upon himself and his sister [8]. And all the rest that was
                movable he sold, and having got together much money he gave it to the poor, reserving a
              little however for his sister's sake.
               3. And again as he went into the church, hearing the Lord say in the Gospel [9], ' be
                not anxious for the morrow,' he could stay no longer, but went out and gave those things
                also to the poor. Having committed his sister to known and faithful virgins, and put her
                into a convent [10] to be brought up, he henceforth devoted himself outside his house to
                discipline [11], taking heed to himself and training himself with patience. For there were
                not yet so many monasteries [12] in Egypt, and no monk at all knew of the distant desert;
                but all who wished to give heed to themselves practised the discipline in solitude near
                their own village. Now there was then in the next village an old man who had lived the
                life of a hermit from his youth up. Antony, after he had seen this man, imitated him in
                piety. And at first he began to abide in places out side the village: then if he heard of
                a good man anywhere, like the prudent bee, he went forth and sought him, nor turned back
                to his own palace until he had seen him; and he returned, having got from the good man as
                it were supplies for his journey in the way of virtue. So dwelling there at first, he
                confirmed his purpose not to return to the abode of his fathers nor to the remembrance of
                his kinsfolk; but to keep all his desire and energy for perfecting his discipline. He
                worked, however. with his hands, having heard, 'he who is idle let him not eat [13],' and
                part he spent on bread and part he gave to the needy. And he was constant in prayer,
                knowing that a man ought to pray in secret unceasingly [14]. For he had given such heed to
                what was read that none of the things that were written fell from him to the ground, but
              he remembered all, and afterwards his memory served him for books.
               4. Thus conducting himself, Antony was beloved by all. He subjected himself in
                sincerity to the good men whom he visited, and learned thoroughly where each surpassed him
                in zeal and discipline. He observed the graciousness of one; the unceasing prayer of
                another; he took knowledge of another's freedom from anger and another's loving-kindness;
                he gave heed to one as he watched, to another as he studied; one he admired for his
                endurance, another for his fasting and sleeping on the ground; the meekness of one and the
                long-suffering of another he watched with care, while he took note of the piety towards
                Christ and the mutual love which animated all. Thus filled, he returned to his own place
                of discipline, and henceforth would strive to unite the qualities of each, and was eager
                to show in himself the virtues of all. With others of the same age he had no rivalry; save
                this only, that he should not be second to them in higher things. And this he did so as to
                hurt the feelings of nobody, but made them rejoice over him. So all they of that village
                and the good men in whose intimacy he was, when they saw that he was a man of this sort,
              used to call him God-beloved. And some welcomed him as a son, others as a brother.
               5. But the devil, who hates and envies what is good, could not endure to see such a
                resolution in a youth, but endeavoured to carry out against him what he had been wont to
                effect against others. First of all he tried to lead him away from the discipline,
              whispering to him the remembrance of
               197
               his wealth, care for his sister, claims of kindred, love of money, love of glory, the
                various pleasures of the table and the other relaxations of life, and at last the
                difficulty of virtue and the labour of it; he suggested also the infirmity of the body and
                the length of the time. In a word he raised in his mind a great dust of debate, wishing to
                debar him from his settled purpose. But when the enemy saw himself to be too weak for
                Antony's determination, and that he rather was conquered by the other's firmness,
                overthrown by his great faith and falling through his constant prayers, then at length
                putting his trust in the weapons which are [15] 'in the navel of his belly' and boasting
                in them--for they are his first snare for the young--he attacked the young man, disturbing
                him by night and harassing him by day, so that even the onlookers saw the struggle which
                was going on between them. The one would suggest foul thoughts and the other counter them
                with prayers: the one fire him with lush the other, as one who seemed to blush, fortify
                his body with faith, prayers, and fasting. And the devil, unhappy wight, one night even
                took upon him the shape of a woman and imitated all her acts simply to beguile Antony. But
                he, his mind filled with Christ and the nobility inspired by Him, and considering the
                spirituality of the soul, quenched the coal of the other's deceit. Again the enemy
                suggested the ease of pleasure. But he like a man filled with rage and grief turned his
                thoughts to the threatened fire and the gnawing worm, and setting these in array against
                his adversary, passed through the temptation unscathed. All this was a source of shame to
                his foe. For he, deeming himself like God, was now mocked by a young man; and he who
                boasted himself against flesh and blood was being put to flight by a man in the flesh. For
                the Lord was working with Antony--the Lord who for our sake took flesh [16] and gave the
                body victory over the devil, so that all who truly fight can say [17], ' not I but the
              grace of God which was with me.'
               6. At last when the dragon could not even thus overthrow Antony, but saw himself thrust
                out of his heart, gnashing his teeth as it is written, and as it were beside himself, he
                appeared to Antony like a black boy, taking a visible shape [17a] in accordance with the
                colour of his mind. And cringing to him, as it were, he plied him with thoughts no longer,
                for guileful as he was, he had been worsted, but at last spoke in human voice and said,
                'Many I deceived, many I cast down; but now attacking thee and thy labours as I had many
                others, I proved weak.' When Antony asked, Who art thou who speakest thus with me ? he
                answered with a lamentable voice, 'I am the friend of whoredom, and have taken upon me
                incitements which lead to it against the young. I am called the spirit of lust. How many
                have I deceived who wished to live soberly, how many are the chaste whom by my incitements
                I have over-persuaded! I am he on account of whom also the prophet reproves those who have
                fallen, saying [17b], "Ye have been caused to err by the spirit of whoredom."
                For by me they have been tripped up. I am he who have so often troubled thee and have so
                often been overthrown by thee.' But Antony having given thanks to the Lord, with good
                courage said to him, ' Thou art very despicable then, for thou art black-hearted and weak
                as a child. Henceforth I shall have no trouble from thee [18], "for the Lord is my
                helper, and I shall look down on mine enemies."' Having heard this, the black one
                straightway fled, shuddering at the words and dreading any longer even to come near the
              man.
               7. This was Antony's first struggle against the devil, or rather this victory was the
                Saviour's work in Antony [19], 'Who condemned sin in the flesh that the ordinance of the
                law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.' But
                neither did Antony, although the evil one had fallen, henceforth relax his care and
                despise him; nor did the enemy as though conquered tease to lay snares for him. For again
                he went round as a lion seeking some occasion against him. But Antony having learned from
                the Scriptures that the devices [20] of the devil are many, zealously continued the
                discipline, reckoning that though the devil had not been able to deceive his heart by
                bodily pleasure, he would endeavour to ensnare him by other means. For the demon loves
                sin. Wherefore more and more he repressed the body and kept it in subjection [1], lest
                haply having conquered on one side, he should be dragged down on the other. He therefore
                planned to accustom himself to a severer mode of life. And many marvelled, but he himself
                used to bear the labour easily; for the eagerness of soul, through the length of time it
                had abode in him, had wrought a good habit in him, so that taking but little initiation
                from others he shewed great zeal in this matter. He kept vigil to such an extent that he
              often continued the
               198
               whole night without sleep; and this not once but often, to the marvel of other. He ate
                once a day, after sunset, sometimes once in two days, and often even in four. His food was
                bread and salt, his drink, water only. Of flesh and wine it is superfluous even to speak,
                since no such thing was found with the other earnest men. A rush mat served him to sleep
                upon, but for the most part he lay upon the bare ground. He would not anoint himself with
                oil, saying it behoved young men to be earnest in training and not to seek what would
                enervate the body; but they must accustom it to labour, mindful of the Apostle's words
                [2], ' when I am weak, then am I strong.' 'For,' said he, 'the fibre of the soul is then
                sound when the pleasures of the body are diminished.' And he had come to this truly
                wonderful conclusion, 'that progress in virtue, and retirement from the world for the sake
                of it, ought not to be measured by time, but by desire and fixity of purpos. He at least
                gave no thought to the past, but day by day, as if he were at the beginning of his
                discipline, applied greater pares for advancement, often repeating to himself the saying
                of Paul [3]: 'Forgetting the things which are behind and stretching forward to the things
                which are before.' He was also mindful of the words spoken by the prophet Elias [4], 'the
                Lord liveth before whose presence I stand to-day.' For he observed that in saying 'to-day'
                the prophet did not compute the time that had gone by: but daily as though ever commencing
                he eagerly endeavoured to make himself fit to appear before God, being pure in heart and
                ever ready to submit to His counsel, and to Him alone. And he used to say to himself that
              from the life of the great Elias the hermit ought to see his own as in a mirror.
               8. Thus tightening his hold upon himself, Antony departed to the tombs, which happened
                to be at a distance from the village; and having bid one of his acquaintances to bring him
                bread at intervals of many days, he entered one of the tombs, and the other having shut
                the door on him, he remained within alone. And when the enemy could not endure it. but was
                even fearful that in a short time Antony would fill the desert with the discipline, coming
                one night with a multitude of demons, he so cut him with stripes that he lay on the ground
                speechless from the excessive pain. For he affirmed that the torture had been so excessive
                that no blows inflicted by man could ever have caused him such torment. But by the
                Providence of God--for the Lord never overlooks them that hope in Him--the next day his
                acquaintance came bringing him the loaves. And having opened the door and seeing him lying
                on the ground as though dead, he lifted him up and carried him to the church in the
                village, and laid him upon the ground. And many of his kinsfolk and the villagers sat
                around Antony as round a corpse. But about midnight he came to himself and arose, and when
                be saw them all asleep and his comrade alone watching, he motioned with his head for him
              to approach, and asked him to carry him again to the tombs without waking anybody.
               9. He was carried therefore by the man, and as he was wont, when the door was shut he
                was within alone. And he could not stand up on account of the blows, but he prayed as he
                lay. And after he had prayed, he said with a shout, Here am I, Antony; I flee not from
                your stripes, for even if you inflict more nothing shall separate rues from the love of
                Christ. And then he sang, 'though a camp be set against me, my heart shall not be afraid
                [6].' These were the thoughts and words of this ascetic. But the enemy, who hates good,
                marvelling that after the blows he dared to return, called together his hounds and burst
                forth, 'Ye see,' said he, 'that neither by the spirit of lust nor by blows did we stay the
                man, but that he braves us, let us attack him in another fashion.' But changes of form for
                evil are easy for the devil, so in the night they made such a din that the whole of that
                place seemed to be shaken by an earthquake, and the demons as if breaking the four walls
                of the dwelling seemed to enter through them, coming in the likeness of beasts and
                creeping things. And the place was on a sudden filled with the forms of lions, bears,
                leopards, bulls, serpents, asps, scorpions, and wolves, and each of them was moving
                according to his nature. The lion was roaring, wishing to attack, the bull seeming to toss
                with its horns, the serpent writhing but unable to approach, and the wolf as it rushed on
                was restrained; altogether the noises of the apparitions, with their angry ragings, were
                dreadful. But Antony, stricken and goaded by them, felt bodily pains severer still. He lay
                watching, however, with unshaken soul, groaning from bodily anguish; but his mind was
                clear, and as in mockery he said, 'If there had been any power in you, it would have
                sufficed had one of you come, but since the Lord hath made you weak you attempt to terrify
                me by numbers: and a proof of your weakness is that you take the shapes of brute beasts.'
              And again with boldness he said, 'If you are able, and have received power
               199
               against me, delay not to attack; but if you are unable, why trouble me in vain ? For
                faith in our Lord is a seal and a wall of safety to us.' So after many attempts they
              gnashed their teeth upon him, because they were mocking themselves rather than him.
               10. Nor was the Lord then forgetful of Antony's wrestling, but was at hand to help him.
                So looking up he saw the roof as it were opened, and a ray of light descending to him. The
                demons suddenly vanished, the pain of his body straightway ceased, and the building was
                again whole. But Antony feeling the help, and getting his breath again, and being freed
                from pain, besought the vision which had appeared to him, saying, 'Where wert thou ? Why
                didst thou not appear at the beginning to make my pains to cease?' And a voice came to
                him, 'Antony, I was here, but I waited to see thy fight; wherefore since thou hast
                endured, and hast not been worsted, I will ever be a succour to thee, and will make thy
                name known everywhere.' Having heard this, Antony arose and prayed, and received such
                strength that he perceived that he had more power in his body than formerly.And he was
              then about thirty-five years old.
               11. And on the day following he went forth still more eagerly bent on the service of
                God and having fallen in with the old man he had met previously, he asked him to dwell
                with him in the desert. But when the other declined on account of his great age, and
                because as yet there was no such custom, Antony himself set off forthwith to the mountain.
                And yet again the enemy seeing his zeal and wishing to hinder it, east in his way what
                seemed to be a great silver dish. But Antony, seeing the guile of the Evil One, stood, and
                having looked on the dish, he put the devil in it to shame, saying, 'Whence comes a dish
                in the desert ? This road is not well-worn, nor is there here a trace of any wayfarer; it
                could not have fallen without being missed on account of its size; and he who had lost it
                having turned back, to seek it, would have found it, for it is a desert place. This is
                some wile of the devil. O thou Evil One, not with this shalt thou hinder my purpose; let
                it go with thee to destruction. [3]' And when Antony had said this it vanished like smoke
              from the face of fire.
               12. Then again as he went on he saw what was this time not visionary, but real gold
                scattered in the way. But whether the devil showed it, or some better power to try the
                athlete and show the Evil One that Antony truly cared nought for money, neither he told
                nor do we know. But it is certain that that which appeared was gold. And Antony marvelled
                at the quantity, but passed it by as though he were going over fire; so he did not even
                turn, but hurried on at a run to lose sight of the place. More and more confirmed in his
                purpose, he hurried to the mountain, and having found a fort, so long deserted that it was
                full of creeping things, on the other side of the river; he crossed over to it and dwelt
                there. The reptiles, as though some one were chasing them, immediately left the place. But
                he built up the entrance completely, having stored up loaves for six months--this is a
                custom of the Thebans, and the loaves often remain fresh a whole year--and as he found
                water within, he descended as into a shrine, and abode within by himself, never going
                forth nor looking at any one who came. Thus he employed a long time training himself, and
              received loaves, let down from above, twice in the year.
               13. But those of his acquaintances who came, since he did not permit them to enter,
                often used to spend days and nights outside, and heard as it were crowds within
                clamouring, dinning, sending forth piteous voices and crying, 'Go from what is ours. What
                dost thou even in the desert? Thou canst not abide our attack.' So at first those outside
                thought there were some men fighting with him, and that they had entered by ladders; but
                when stooping down they saw through a hole there was nobody, they were afraid, accounting
                them to be demons, and they called on Antony. Them he quickly heard, though he had not
                given a thought to the demons, and coming to the door he besought them to depart and not
                to be afraid, 'for thus,' said he, 'the demons make their seeming onslaughts against those
                who are cowardly. Sign yourselves therefore with the cross [4], and depart boldly, and let
                these make sport for themselves.' So they departed fortified with the sign of the Cross.
                But he remained in no wise harmed by the evil spirits, nor was he wearied with the
                contest, for there came to his aid visions from above, and the weakness of the foe
                relieved him of much trouble and armed him with greater zeal. For his acquaintances used
                often to come expecting to find him dead, and would hear him singing [5], ' Let God arise
                and let His enemies be scattered, let them also that hate Him flee before His face. As
                smoke vanisheth, let them vanish; as wax melteth before the face of fire, so let the
                sinners perish from the face of God ;' and again, 'All nations compassed me about, and in
              the name of the Lord I requited them [6].'
               200
               14. And so for nearly twenty years he continued training himself in solitude, never
                going forth, and but seldom seen by any. After this when many were eager and wishful to
                imitate his discipline, and his acquaintances came and began to cast down and wrench off
                the door by force, Antony, as from a shrine, came forth initiated in the mysteries and
                filled with the Spirit of God. Then for the first time he was seen outside the fort by
                those who came to see him. And they, when they saw him, wondered at the sight, for he had
                the same habit of body as before, and was neither fat, like a man without exercise, nor
                lean from fasting and striving with the demons, but he was just the same as they had known
                him before his retirement, And again his soul was free from blemish, for it was neither
                contracted as if by grief, nor relaxed by pleasure, nor possessed by laughter or
                dejection, for he was not troubled when he beheld the crowd, nor overjoyed at being
                saluted by so many. But he was altogether even as being guided by reason, and abiding in a
                natural state. Through him the Lord healed the bodily ailments of many present, and
                cleansed others from evil spirits. And He gave grace to Antony in speaking, so that he
                consoled many that were sorrowful, and set those at variance at one, exhorting all to
                prefer the love of Christ before all that is in the world. And while he exhorted and
                advised them to remember the good things to come, and the loving-kindness of God towards
                us, 'Who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all [7],' he persuaded many
                to embrace the solitary life. And thus it happened in the end that cells arose even in the
                mountains, and the desert was colonised by monks, who came forth from their own people,
              and enrolled themselves for the citizenship in the heavens.
               15. But when he was obliged to cross the Arsenoitic Canal [8]--and the occasion of it
                was the visitation of the brethren--the canal was full of crocodiles. And by simply
                praying, he entered it, and all they with him, and passed over in safety. And having
                returned to his ceil, he applied himself to the same noble and valiant exercises; and by
                frequent conversation he increased the eagerness of those already monks, stirred up in
                most of the rest the love of the discipline, and speedily by the attraction of his words.
              cells multiplied, and he directed them all as a father.
               16. One day when he had gone forth because all the monks had assembled to him and asked
                to hear words from him, he spoke to them in the Egyptian tongue as follows: 'The
                Scriptures are enough for instruction 9, but it is a good thing to encourage one another
                in the faith, and to stir up with words. Wherefore you, as children, carry that which you
                know to your father; and I as the elder share my knowledge and what experience has taught
                me with you. Let this especially be the common aim of all, neither to give way having once
                begun, nor to faint in trouble, nor to say: We have lived in the discipline a long time:
                but rather as though making a beginning daily let us increase our earnestness. For the
                whole life of man is very short, measured by the ages to come, wherefore all our time is
                nothing compared with eternal life. And in the world everything is sold at its price, and
                a man exchanges one equivalent for another; but the promise of eternal life is bought for
                a trifle. For it is written, "The days of our life in them are threescore years and
                ten, but if they are in strength, fourscore years, and what is more than these is labour
                and sorrow [10]. "Whenever, therefore, we live full fourscore years, or even a
                hundred in the discipline, not for a hundred years only shall we reign, but instead of a
                hundred we shall reign for ever and ever. And though we fought on earth, we shall not
                receive our inheritance on earth, but we have the promises in heaven; and having put off
              the body which is corrupt, we shall receive it incorrupt.
               17. ' Wherefore, children, let us not faint nor deem that the time is long, or that we
                are doing something great, "for the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to
                be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to us-ward [11]" Nor let us think,
                as we look at the world, that we have renounced anything of much consequence, for the
                whole earth is very small compared with all the heaven. Wherefore if it even chanced that
                we were lords of all the earth and gave it all up, it would be nought worthy of comparison
                with the kingdom of heaven. For as if a man should despise a copper drachma to gain a
                hundred drachmas of gold; so if a man were lord of all the earth and were to renounce it,
                that which he gives up is little, and he receives a hundredfold. But if not even the whole
                earth is equal in value to the heavens, then he who has given up a few acres leaves as it
                were nothing; and even if he have given up a house or much gold he ought not to boast nor
                be low-spirited. Further, we should consider that even if we do not relinquish them for
                virtue's sake, still afterwards when we die we shall leave them behind--very often, as the
                Preacher saith [12], to those to whom we do not wish. Why then should we not give them up
              for virtue's sake, that we may inherit even a kingdom? Therefore let the
               201
               desire of possession take hold of no one, for what gain is it to acquire these things
                which we cannot take with us? Why not rather get those things which we can take away with
                us--to wit, prudence, justice, temperance, courage, understanding, love, kindness to the
                poor, faith in Christ, freedom from wrath, hospitality? If we possess these, we shall find
              them of themselves preparing for us a welcome there in the land of the meek-hearted.
               18. 'And so from such things let a man persuade himself not to make light of it,
                especially if he considers that he himself is the servant of the Lord, and ought to serve
                his Master. Wherefore as a servant would not dare to say, because I worked yesterday, I
                will not work today; and considering the past will do no work in the future; but, as it is
                written in the Gospel, daily shows the same readiness to please his master, and to avoid
                risk: so let us daily abide firm in our discipline, knowing that if we are careless for a
                single day the Lord will not pardon us, for the sake of the past, but will be wrath
                against us for our neglect. As also we have heard in Ezekiel [13]; and as Judas because of
              one night destroyed his previous labour.
               19. 'Wherefore, children, let us hold fast our discipline, and let us not be careless.
                For in it the Lord is our fellow-worker, as it is written, "to all that choose the
                good, God worketh with them for good [14]." But to avoid being heedless, it is good
                to consider the word of the Apostle, "I die daily. [15].'' For if we too live as
                though dying daily, we shall not sin. And the meaning of that saying is, that as we rise
                day by day we should think that we shall not abide till evening; and again, when about to
                lie down to sleep, we should think that we shall not rise up. For our life is naturally
                uncertain, and Providence allots it to us daily. But thus ordering our daily life, we
                shall neither fall into sin, nor have a lust for anything, nor cherish wrath against any,
                nor shall we heap up treasure upon earth. But, as though under the daily expectation of
                death, we shall be without wealth, and shall forgive all things to all men, nor shall we
                retain at all the desire of women or of any other foul pleasure. But we shall turn from it
                as past and gone, ever striving and looking forward to the day of Judgment. For the
                greater dread and danger of torment ever destroys the ease of pleasure, and sets up the
              soul if it is like to fall.
               20. 'Wherefore having already begun and set out in the way of virtue, let us strive the
                more that we may attain those things that are before. And let no one turn to the things
                behind, like Lot's wife, all the more so that the Lord hath said, "No man, having put
                his hand to the plough, and turning back, is fit for the kingdom of heavens [16]."
                And this turning back is nought else but to feel regret, and to be once more
                worldly-minded. But fear not to hear of virtue, nor be astonished at the name. For it is
                not far from us, nor is it without ourselves, but it is within us, and is easy if only we
                are willing. That they may get knowledge, the Greeks live abroad and cross the sea, but we
                have no need to depart from home for the sake of the kingdom of heaven, nor to cross the
                sea for the sake of virtue. For the Lord aforetime hath said, "The kingdom of heaven
                is within you [17].'' Wherefore virtue hath need at our hands of willingness alone, since
                it is in us and is formed from us. For when the soul hath its spiritual faculty in a
                natural state virtue is formed. And it is in a natural state when it remains as it came
                into existence. And when it came into existence it was fair and exceeding honest. For this
                cause Joshua, the son of Nun, in his exhortation said to the people," Make straight
                your heart unto the Lord God of Israel [18]," and John, "Make your paths
                straight [19]." For rectitude of soul consists in its having its spiritual part in
                its natural state as created. But on the other hand, when it swerves and turns away from
                its natural state, that is called vice of the soul Thus the matter is not difficult. If we
                abide as we have been made, we are in a state of virtue, but if we think of ignoble things
                we shall be accounted evil. If, therefore, this thing had to be acquired from without, it
                would be difficult in reality; but if it is in us, let us keep ourselves from foul
                thoughts. And as we have received the soul as a deposit, let us preserve it for the Lord,
              that He may recognise His work as being the same as He made it.
               21. 'And let us strive that wrath rule us not nor lust overcome us, for it is written,
                "The wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God. And lust, when it hath
                conceived, beareth sin, and the sin when it is full grown bringeth forth death [20].''
                Thus living, let us keep guard carefully, and as it is written, "keep our hearts with
                all watchfulness [1]." For we have terrible and crafty foes--the evil spirits--and
                against them we wrestle, as the Apostle said," Not against flesh and blood, but
                against the principalities and against the powers, against the world-rulers of this
                darkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places [1a]."
              Great is their
               202
               number in the air around us", and they are not far from us. Now there are great
                distinctions among them; and concerning their nature and distinctions much could be said,
                but such a description is for others of greater powers than we possess. But at this time
              it is pressing and necessary for us only to know their wiles against ourselves.
               22. 'First, therefore, we must know this: that the demons have not been created like
                what we mean when we call them by that name for God made nothing evil, but even they have
                been made good. Having fallen, however, from the heavenly wisdom, since then they have
                been grovelling on earth. On the one hand they deceived the Greeks with their displays,
                while out of envy of us Christians they move all things in their desire to hinder us from
                entry into the heavens; in order that we should not ascend up thither from whence they
                fell. Thus there is need of much prayer and of discipline, that when a man has received
                through the Spirit the gift of discerning spirits, he may have power to recognise their
                characteristics: which of them are less and which more evil; of what nature is the special
                pursuit of each, and how each of them is overthrown and cast out. For their villainies and
                the changes in their plots are many. The blessed Apostle and his followers knew such
                things when they said, "for we are not ignorant of his devices [3];" and we,
                from the temptations we have suffered at their hands, ought to correct one another under
              them. Wherefore I, having had proof of them, speak as to children.
               23. 'The demons, therefore, if they see all Christians, and monks especially, labouring
                cheerfully and advancing, first make an attack by temptation and place hindrances to
                hamper our way, to wit, evil thoughts. But we need not fear their suggestions, for by
                prayer, fasting, and faith in the Lord their attack immediately fails. But even when it
                does they cease not, but knavishly by subtlety come on again. For when they cannot deceive
                the heart openly with foul pleasures they approach in different guise, and thenceforth
                shaping displays they attempt to strike fear, changing their shapes, taking the forms of
                women, wild beasts, creeping things, gigantic bodies, and troops of soldiers. But not even
                then need ye fear their deceitful displays. For they are nothing and quickly disappear,
                especially if a man fortify himself beforehand with faith and the sign of the cross [4].
                Yet are they bold and very shameless, for if thus they are worsted they make an onslaught
                in another manner, and pretend to prophesy and foretell the future, and to shew themselves
                of a height reaching to the roof and of great breadth; that they may stealthily catch by
                such displays those who could not be deceived by their arguments. If here also they find
                the soul strengthened by faith and a hopeful mind, then they bring their leader to their
              aid.
               24. 'And he said they often appeared as the Lord revealed the devil to Job, saying,
                "His eyes are as the morning star. From his mouth proceed burning lamps and hearths
                of fire are east forth. The smoke of a furnace blazing with the fire of coals proceeds
                from his nostrils. His breath is coals and from his mouth issues flames." When the
                prince of the demons appears in this wise, the crafty one, as I said before, strikes
                terror by speaking great things, as again the Lord convicted him saying to Job, for
                "he counteth iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood, yea he counteth the sea as a
                pot of ointment, and the depth of the abyss as a captive, and the abyss as a covered walk
                [6]." And by the prophet, "the enemy said, I will pursue and overtake [7],"
                and again by another, "I will grasp the whole world in my hand as a nest, and take it
                up as eggs that have been left [8]." Such, in a word, are their boasts and
                professions that they may deceive the godly. But not even then ought we, the faithful, to
                fear his appearance or give heed to his words. For he is a liar and speaketh of truth
                never a word. And though speaking words so many and so great in his boldness, without
                doubt, like a dragon he was drawn with a hook by the Saviour [9], and as a beast of burden
                he received the halter round his nostrils, and as a runaway his nostrils were bound with a
                ring, and his lips bored with an armlet [10]. And he was bound by the Lord as a sparrow,
                that we should mock him. And with him are placed the demons his fellows, like serpents and
                scorpions to be trodden underfoot by us Christians. And the proof of this is that we now
                live opposed to him. For he who threatened to dry the sea and seize upon the world, behold
                now cannot stay our discipline, nor even me speaking against him. Let us then heed not his
                words, for he is a liar: and let us not fear his visions, seeing that they themselves are
                deceptive. For that which appears in them is no true light, but they are rather the
                preludes and likenesses of the fire prepared for the demons who attempt to terrify men
              with those flames in which they themselves will be burned. Doubt-
               203
               less they appear; but in a moment disappear again, hurting none of the faithful, but
                bringing with them the likeness of that fire which is about to receive themselves.
                Wherefore it is unfitting that we should fear them on account of these things; for through
              the grace of Christ all their practices are in vain.
               25. 'Again they are treacherous, and are ready to change themselves into all forms and
                assume all appearances. Very often also without appearing they imitate the music of harp
                and voice, and recall the words of Scripture. Sometimes, too, while we are reading they
                immediately repeat many times, like an echo, what is read. They arouse us from our sleep
                to prayers; and this constantly, hardly allowing us to sleep at all. At another time they
                assume the appearance of monks and feign the speech of holy men, that by their similarity
                they may deceive and thus drag their victims where they will. But no heed must be paid
                them even if they arouse to prayer, even if they counsel us not to eat at all even though
                they seem to accuse and cast shame upon us for those things which once they allowed. For
                they do this not for the sake of piety or truth, but that they may carry off the simple to
                despair; and that they may say the discipline is useless, and make men loathe the solitary
              life as a trouble and burden, and hinder those who in spite of them walk in it.
               26. 'Wherefore the prophet sent by the Lord declared them to be wretched, saying:
                "Wo is he who giveth his neighbours to drink muddy destruction [11]." For such
                practices and devices are subversive of the way which leads to virtue. And the Lord
                Himself, even if the demons spoke the truth,--for they said truly "Thou art the Son
                of God [12]" --still bridled their mouths and suffered them not to speak lest haply
                they should sow their evil along with the truth, and that He might accustom us never to
                give heed to them even though they appear to speak what is true. For it is unseemly that
                we, having the holy Scriptures and freedom from the Saviour, should be taught by the devil
                who hath not kept his own order but hath gone from one mind to another [13]. Wherefore
                even when he uses the language of Scripture He forbids him, saying: "But to the
                sinner said God, Wherefore dost thou declare My ordinances and takest My covenant in thy
                mouth [14]?" For the demons do all things --they prate, they confuse, they dissemble,
                they confound--to deceive the simple. They din, laugh madly, and whistle; but if no heed
              is paid to them forthwith they weep and lament as though vanquished.
               27. 'The Lord therefore, as God, stayed the mouths of the demons: and it is fitting
                that we, taught by the saints, should do like them and imitate their courage. For they
                when they saw these things used to say: "When the sinner rose against me, I was dumb
                and humble, and kept silence from good words [15]." And again: "But I was as a
                deaf man and heard not, and as a dumb man who openeth not his mouth, and I became as a man
                who heareth not [16].'' So let us neither hear them as being strangers to us, nor give
                heed to them even through they arouse us to prayer and speak concerning fasting. But let
                us rather apply ourselves to our resolve of discipline, and let us not be deceived by them
                who do all things in deceit, even though they threaten death. For they are weak and can do
              nought but threaten.
               28. 'Already in passing I have spoken on these things, and now I must not shrink from
                speaking on them at greater length, for to put you in remembrance will be a source of
                safety. Since the Lord visited earth [17], the enemy is fallen and his powers weakened.
                Wherefore although he could do nothing, still like a tyrant, he did not bear his fall
                quietly, but threatened, though his threats were words only. And let each one of you
                consider this, and he will be able to despise the demons. Now if they were hampered with
                such bodies as we are, it would be possible for them to say, "Men when they are
                hidden we cannot find, but whenever we do find them we do them hurt." And we also by
                lying in concealment could escape them, shutting the doors against them. But if they are
                not of such a nature as this, but are able to enter in, though the doors be shut, and
                haunt all the air, both they and their leader the devil, and are wishful for evil and
                ready to injure; and, as the Saviour said, "From the beginning the devil is a
                manslayer and a father of vice [18];" while we, though this is so, are alive, and
                spend our lives all the more in opposing him; it is plain they are powerless. For place is
                no hindrance to their plots, nor do they look on us as friends that they should spare us;
                nor are they lovers of good that they should amend. But on the contrary they are evil, and
                nothing is so much sought after by them as wounding them that love virtue and fear God.
                But since they have no power to effect anything, they do nought but threaten. But if they
              could, they would not
               204
               hesitate, but forthwith work evil (for all their desire is set on this), and especially
                against us. Behold now we are gathered together and speak against them, and they know when
                we advance they grow weak. If therefore they had power they would permit none of us
                Christians to live, for godliness is an abomination to a sinner [19]. But since they can
                do nothing they inflict the greater wounds on themselves; for they can fulfil none of
                their threats. Next this ought to be considered, that we may be in no fear of them: that
                if they had the power they would not come in crowds, nor fashion displays, nor with change
                of form would they frame deceits. But it would suffice that one only should come and
                accomplish that which he was both able and willing to do: especially as every one who has
                the power neither slays with display nor strikes fear with tumult, but forthwith makes
                full use of his authority as he wishes. But the demons as they have no power are like
                actors on the stage changing their shape and frightening children with tumultuous
                apparition and various forms: from which they ought rather to be despised as shewing their
                weakness. At least the true angel of the Lord sent against the Assyrian had no need for
                tumults nor displays from without, nor noises nor rattlings, but in quiet he used his
                power and forthwith destroyed a hundred and eighty-five thousand. But demons like these,
              who have no power, try to terrify at least by their displays [20].
               29. 'But if any one having in mind the history of Job [1] should say, Why then hath the
                devil gone forth and accomplished all things against him; and stripped him of all his
                possessions, and slew his children, and smote him with evil ulcers? let such a one, on the
                other hand, recognise that the devil was not the strong man, but God who delivered Job to
                him to be tried. Certainly he had no power to do anything, but he asked, and having
                received it, he hath wrought what he did. So also from this the enemy is the more to be
                condemned, for although willing he could not prevail against one just man. For if he could
                have, he would not have asked permission. But having asked not once but also a second
                time, he shows his weakness and want of power. And it is no wonder if he could do nothing
                against Job, when destruction would not have come even on his cattle had not God allowed
                it. And he has not the power over swine, for as it is written in the Gospel, they besought
                the Lord, saying, "Let us enter the swine [2]." But if they had power not even
              against swine, much less have they any over men formed [3] in the image of God.
               30. 'So then we ought to fear God only, and despise the demons, and be in no fear of
                them. But the more they do these things the more let us intensify our discipline against
                them, for a good life and faith in God is a great weapon. At any rate they fear the
                fasting, the sleeplessness, the prayers, the meekness, the quietness, the contempt of
                money and vainglory, the humility, the love of the poor, the alms, the freedom from anger
                of the ascetics, and, chief of all, their piety towards Christ. Wherefore they do all
                things that they may not have any that trample on them, knowing the grace given to the
                faithful against them by the Saviour, when He says, "Behold I have given to you power
              to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy [4]."
               31. 'Wherefore if they pretend to foretell the future, let no one give heed, for often
                they announce beforehand that the brethren are coming days after. And they do come. The
                demons, however, do this not from any care for the hearers, but to gain their trust, and
                that then at length, having got them in their power, they may destroy them. Whence we must
                give no heed to them, but ought rather to confute them when speaking, since we do not need
                them. For what wonder is it, if with more subtle bodies than men haves, when they have
                seen them start on their journey, they surpass them in speed, and announce their coming?
                Just as a horseman getting a start of a man on foot announces the arrival of the latter
                beforehand, so in this there is no need for us to wonder at them. For they know none of
                those things which are not yet in existence; but God only is He who knoweth all things
                before their birth [6]. But these, like thieves, running off first with what they see,
                proclaim it: to how many already have they announced our business--that we are assembled
                together, and discuss measures against them, before any one of us could go and tell these
                things. This in good truth a fleet-footed boy could do, getting far ahead of one less
                swift. But what I mean is this. If any one begins to walk from the Thebaid, or from any
                other district, before he begins to walk, they do not know whether he will walk. But when
                they have seen him walking they run on, and before he comes up report his approach. And so
                it falls out that after a few days the travellers arrive. But often the walkers turn back,
                and the demons prove false. 35. 'So, too, with respect to the water of the river, they
                sometimes make foolish statements, For having seen that there has been much rain in the
                regions of Ethiopia, and knowing that they are the cause of the flood of the river before
                the water has come to Egypt they run on and announce it. And this men could have told, if
                they had as great power of running as the demons. And as David's spy [7] going up to a
                lofty place saw the man approaching better than one who stayed down below, and the
                forerunner himself announced, before the others came up, not those things which had not
                taken place, but those things which were already on the way and were being accomplished,
                so these also prefer to labour, and declare what is happening to others simply for the
                sake of deceiving them. If, however, Providence meantime plans anything different for the
                waters or wayfarers--for Providence can do this--the demons are deceived, and those who
                gave heed to them cheated. 33. 'Thus in days gone by arose the oracles of the Greeks, and
                thus they were led astray by the demons. But thus also thenceforth their deception was
                brought to an end by the coming of the Lord [8], who brought to nought the demons and
                their devices. For they know nothing of themselves, but, like thieves, what they get to
                know from others they pass on, and guess at rather than foretell things. Therefore if
                sometimes they speak the truth, let no one marvel at them for this. For experienced
                physicians also, since they see the same malady in different people, often foretell what
                it is, making it out by their acquaintance with it. Pilots, too, and farmers, from their
                familiarity with the weather, tell at a glance the state of the atmosphere, and forecast
                whether it will be stormy or fine. And no one would say that they do this by inspiration,
                but from experience and practice. So if the demons sometimes do the same by guesswork, let
                no one wonder at it or heed them. For what use to the hearers is it to know from them what
                is going to happen before the time? Or what concern have we to know such things, even if
                the knowledge be true? For it is not productive of virtue, nor is it any token of
                goodness. For none of us is judged for what he knows not, and no one is called blessed
                because he hath learning and knowledge. But each one will be called to judgment in these
              points--whether he have kept the faith and truly observed the commandments.
               34. 'Wherefore there is no need to set much value on these things, nor for the sake of
                them to practise a life of discipline and labour; but that living well we may please God.
                And we neither ought to pray to know the future, nor to ask for it as the reward of our
                discipline; but our prayer should be that the Lord may be our fellow-helper for victory
                over the devil. And if even once we have a desire to know the future, let us be pure in
                mind, for I believe that if a soul is perfectly pure and in its natural state, it is able
                [9], being clear-sighted, to see more and further than the demons--for it has the Lord who
                reveals to it--like the soul of Elisha, which saw what was done [10] by Gehazi, and beheld
              the hosts [11] standing on its side.
               35. 'When, therefore, they come by night to you and wish to tell the future, or say,
                "we are the angels," give no heed, for they lie. Yea even if they praise your
                discipline and call you blessed, hear them not, and have no dealings with them; but rather
                sign yourselves and your houses, and pray, and you shall see them vanish. For they are
                cowards, and greatly fear the sign of the Lord's Cross, since of a truth in it the Saviour
                stripped them, and made an example of them [11a]. But if they shamelessly stand their
                ground, capering and changing their forms of appearance, fear them not, nor shrink, nor
                heed them as though they were good spirits. For the presence either of the good or evil by
                the help of God can easily be distinguished. The vision of the holy ones is not fraught
                with distraction: "For they will not strive, nor cry, nor shall any one hear their
                voice [12]." But it comes so quietly and gently that immediately joy, gladness and
                courage arise in the soul. For the Lord who is our joy is with them, and the power of God
                the Father. And the thoughts of the soul remain unruffled and undisturbed, so that it,
                enlightened as it were with rays, beholds by itself those who appear. For the love of what
                is divine and of the things to come possesses it, and willingly it would be wholly joined
                with them if it could depart along with them. But if, being men, some fear the vision of
                the good, those who appear immediately take fear away; as Gabriel [13] did in the case of
              Zacharias, and as the angel [14] did who appeared to the women at the holy
               206
               sepulchre, and as He did who said to the shepherds in the Gospel, "Fear not."
                For their fear arose not from timidity, but from the recognition of the presence of
              superior beings. Such then is the nature of the visions of the holy ones.
               36. 'But the inroad and the display of the evil spirits is fraught with confusion, with
                din, with sounds and cryings such as the disturbance of boorish youths or robbers would
                occasion. From which arise fear in the heart, tumult and confusion of thought, dejection,
                hatred towards them who live a life of discipline, indifference, grief, remembrance of
                kinsfolk and fear of death, and finally desire of evil things, disregard of virtue and
                unsettled habits. Whenever, therefore, ye have seen ought and are afraid, if your fear is
                immediately taken away and in place of it comes joy unspeakable, cheerfulness, courage,
                renewed strength, calmness of thought and all those I named before boldness and love
                toward God,--take courage and pray. For joy and a settled state of soul show the holiness
                of him who is present. Thus Abraham beholding the Lord rejoiced [14]; so also John [15] at
                the voice of Mary, the God-bearer [16], leaped for gladness. But if at the appearance of
                any there is confusion, knocking without, worldly display, threats of death and the other
              things which I have already mentioned, know ye that it is an onslaught of evil spirits.
               37. 'And let this also be a token for you: whenever the soul remains fearful there is a
                presence of the enemies. For the demons do not take away the fear of their presence as the
                great archangel Gabriel did for Mary and Zacharias, and as he did who appeared to the
                women at the tomb; but rather whenever they see men afraid they increase their delusions
                that men may be terrified the more; and at last attacking they mock them, saying,
                "fall down and worship." Thus they deceived the Greeks, and thus by them they
                were considered gods, falsely so called. But the Lord did not suffer us to be deceived by
                the devil, for He rebuked him whenever he framed such delusions against Him, saying:
                "Get behind me, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
                Him only shalt thou serve [17]." More and more, therefore, let the deceiver be
                despised by us; for what the Lord hath said, this for our sakes He hath done: that the
                demons hearing like words from us may be put to flight through the Lord who rebuked them
              in those words.
               38. 'And it is not fitting to boast at the casting forth of the demons, nor to be
                uplifted by the healing of diseases: nor is it fitting that he who casts out devils should
                alone be highly esteemed, while he who casts them not out should be considered nought. But
                let a man learn the discipline of each one and either imitate, rival, or correct it. For
                the working of signs is not ours but the Saviour's work: and so He said to His disciples:
                "Rejoice not that the demons are subject to you, but that your names are written in
                the heavens [18]." For the fact that our names are written in heaven is a proof of
                our virtuous life, but to cast out demons is a favour of the Saviour who granted it.
                Wherefore to those who boasted in signs but not in virtue, and said: "Lord, in Thy
                name did we not cast out demons, and in Thy name did many mighty works [19]?" He
                answered, "Verily I say unto you, I know you not;" for the Lord knoweth not the
                ways of the wicked. But we ought always to pray, as I said above, that we may receive the
              gift of discerning spirits; that, as it is written [20], we may not believe every spirit.
               39. 'I should have liked to speak no further and to say nothing from my own promptings,
                satisfied with what I have said: but lest you should think that I speak at random and
                believe that I detail these things without experience or truth; for this cause even though
                I should become as a fool, yet the Lord who heareth knoweth the clearness of my con
                science, and that it is not for my own sake, but on account of your affection towards me
                and at your petition that I again tell what I saw of the practices of evil spirits. How
                often have they called me blessed and I have cursed them in the name of the Lord! How
                often have they predicted the rising of the river, and I answered them, "What have
                you to do with it?" Once they came threatening and surrounded me like soldiers in
                full armour. At another time they filled the house with horses, wild beasts and creeping
                things, and I sang: "Some in chariots and some in horses, but we will boast in the
                name of the Lord our God [1];" and at the prayers they were turned to flight by the
                Lord. Once they came in darkness, bearing the appearance of a light, and said, "We
                are come to give thee a light, Antony." But I closed my eyes and prayed, and
                immediately the light of the wicked ones was quenched. And a few months after they came as
                though singing psalms and babbling the words of Scripture, "But I like a deaf man,
                heard not [2]." Once they shook the cell [3] with an earthquake, but I continued
              praying with unshaken heart. And
               207
               after this they came again making noises, whistling and dancing. But as I prayed and
                lay singing psalms to myself they forthwith began to lament and weep, as if their strength
                had failed them. But I gave glory to the Lord who had brought down and made an example of
              their daring and madness.
               40. 'Once a demon exceeding high appeared with pomp, and dared to say, "I am the
                power of God and I am Providence, what dost thou wish that I shall give thee?" But I
                then so much the more breathed upon him [3a], and spoke the name of Christ, and set about
                to smite him. And I seemed to have smitten him, and forthwith he, big as he was, together
                with all his demons, disappeared at the name of Christ. At another time, while I was
                fasting, he came full of craft, under the semblance of a monk, with what seemed to be
                loaves, and gave me counsel, saying, "Eat and cease from thy many labours. Thou also
                art a man and art like to fall sick." But I, perceiving his device, rose up to pray;
                and he endured it not, for he departed, and through the door there seemed to go out as it
                were smoke. How often in the desert has he displayed what resembled gold, that I should
                only touch it and look on it. But I sang psalms against him, and he vanished away. Often
                they would beat me with stripes, and I repeated again and again, "Nothing shall
                separate me from the love of Christ [4]," and at this they rather fell to beating one
                another. Nor was it I that stayed them and destroyed their power, but it was the Lord, who
                said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from Heavens; [5]" but I, children,
                mindful of the Apostle's words, transferred [6] this to myself, that you might learn not
              to faint in discipline, nor to fear the devil nor the delusions of the demons.
               41. 'And since I have become a fool in detailing these things, receive this also as an
                aid to your safety and fearlessness; and believe me for I do not lie. Once some one
                knocked at the door of my cell, and going forth I saw one who seemed of great size and
                tall. Then when I enquired, "Who art thou?" he said, "I am Satan."
                Then when I said, "Why art thou here?" he answered, "Why do the monks and
                all other Christians blame me undeservedly? Why do they curse me hourly?" Then I
                answered, "Wherefore dost thou trouble them?" He said, "I am not he who
                troubles them, but they trouble themselves, for I am become weak. Have they not read [7],
                "The swords of the enemy have come to an end, and thou hast destroyed the cities
                ?" I have no longer a place, a weapon, a city. The Christians are spread everywhere,
                and at length even the desert is filled with monks. Let them take heed to themselves, and
                let them not curse me unreservedly." Then I marvelled at the grace of the Lord, and
                said to him: "Thou who art ever a liar and never speakest the truth, this at length,
                even against thy will, thou hast truly spoken. For the coming of Christ hath made thee
                weak, and He hath cast thee down and stripped thee." But he having heard the
              Saviour's name, and not being able to bear the burning from it, vanished.
               42. 'If, therefore, the devil himself confesses that his power is gone, we ought
                utterly to despise both him and his demons; and since the enemy with his hounds has but
                devices of this sort, we, having got to know their weakness, are able to despise them.
                Wherefore let us not despond after this fashion, nor let us have a thought of cowardice in
                our heart, nor frame fears for ourselves, saying, I am afraid lest a demon should come and
                overthrow me; lest he should lift me up and cast me down; or lest rising against me on a
                sudden he confound me. Such thoughts let us not have in mind at all, nor let us be
                sorrowful as though we were perishing; but rather let us be courageous and rejoice always,
                believing that we are safe Let us consider in our soul that the Lord is with us, who put
                the evil spirits to flight and broke their power. Let us consider and lay to heart that
                while the Lord is with us, our foes can do us no hurt. For when they come they approach us
                in a form corresponding to the state in which they discover us [8], and adapt their
                delusions to the condition of mind in which they find us. If, therefore, they find us
                timid and confused, they forthwith beset the place, like robbers, having found it
                unguarded; and what we of ourselves are thinking, they do, and more also. For if they find
                us faint-hearted and cowardly, they mightily increase our terror, by their delusions and
                threats; and with these the unhappy soul is thenceforth tormented. But if they see us
                rejoicing in the Lord, contemplating the bliss of the future, mindful of the Lord, deeming
                all things in His hand, and that no evil spirit has any strength against the Christian,
                nor any power at all over any one--when they behold the soul fortified with these
                thoughts--they are discomfited and turned backwards. Thus the enemy, seeing Job fenced
                round with them, withdrew from him; but finding Judas unguarded, him he took captive. Thus
                if we are wishful to despise the enemy, let us ever ponder over the things of the Lord,
              and let the soul ever rejoice in hope. And we
               208
               shall see the snares of the demon are like smoke, and the evil ones themselves flee
                rather than pursue For they are, as I said before, exceeding fearful, ever looking forward
              to the fire prepared for them.
               43. 'And for your fearlessness against them hold this sure sign--whenever there is any
                apparition, be not prostrate with fear, but whatsoever it be, first boldly ask, Who art
                thou? And from whence comest thou? And if it should be a vision of holy ones they will
                assure you, and change your fear into joy. But if the vision should be from the devil,
                immediately it becomes feeble, beholding your firm purpose of mind. For merely to ask, Who
                art thou [9]? and whence comest thou? is a proof of coolness. By thus asking, the son of
              Nun learned who his helper was; nor did the enemy escape the questioning of Daniel [10].'
               44. While Antony was thus speaking all rejoiced; in some the love of virtue increased,
                in others carelessness was thrown aside, the self-conceit of others was stopped; and all
                were persuaded to despise the assaults of the Evil One, and marvelled at the grace given
                to Antony from the Lord for the discerning of spirits. So their cells were in the
                mountains, like filled with holy bands of men who sang psalms, loved reading, fasted,
                prayed, rejoiced in the hope of things to come, laboured in alms-giving, and preserved
                love and harmony one with another. And truly it was possible, as it were, to behold a land
                set by itself, filled with piety and justice. For then there was neither the evil-doer,
                nor the injured, nor the reproaches of the tax-gatherer: but instead a multitude of
                ascetics; and the one purpose of them all was to aim at virtue. So that any one beholding
                the cells again, and seeing such good order among the monks, would lift up his voice and
                say, 'How goodly are thy dwellings, O Jacob, and thy tents, O Israel; as shady glens and
                as a garden [11] by a river; as tents which the Lord hath pitched, and like cedars near
              waters [12].'
               45. Antony, however, according to his custom, returned alone to his own cell increased
                his discipline, and sighed daily as he thought of the mansions in Heaven, having his
                desire fixed on them, and pondering over the shortness of man's life. And he used to eat
                and sleep, and go about all other bodily necessities with shame when he thought of the
                spiritual faculties of the soul. So often, when about to eat with any other hermits,
                recollecting the spiritual food, he begged to be excused, and departed far off from them,
                deeming it a matter for shame if he should be seen eating by others. He used, however,
                when by himself, to eat through bodily necessity, but often also with the brethren;
                covered with shame on these occasions, yet speaking boldly words of help. And he used to
                say that it behoved a man to give all his time to his soul rather than his body, yet to
                grant a short space to the body through its necessities; but all the more earnestly to
                give up the whole remainder to the soul and seek its profit, that it might not be dragged
                down by the pleasures of the body, but, on the contrary, the body might be in subjection
                to the soul. For this is that which was spoken by the Saviour: 'Be not anxious for your
                life what ye shall eat, nor for your body what ye shall put on. And do ye seek not what ye
                shall eat, or what ye shall drink, and be not of a doubtful mind. For all these things the
                nations of the world seek after. But your Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
                things. Howbeit seek ye first His Kingdom, and all these things shall be added unto you
              [13].'
               46. After this the Church was seized by the persecution which then [14] took place
                under Maximinus, and when the holy martyrs were led to Alexandria, Antony also followed,
                leaving his cell, and saying, Let us go too, that if called, we may contend or behold them
                that are contending. And he longed to suffer martyrdom, but not being willing to give
                himself up, he ministered to the confessors in the mines and in the prisons. And he was
                very zealous in the judgment hall to stir up to readiness those who were summoned when in
                their contest, while those who were being martyred he received and brought on their way
                until they were perfected. The judge, therefore, beholding the fearlessness of Antony and
                his companions, and their zeal in this matter, commanded that no monk should appear in the
                judgment hall, nor remain at all in the city. So all the rest thought it good to hide
                themselves that day, but Antony gave so little heed to the command that he washed his
                garment, and stood all next day on a raised place before them, and appeared in his best
                before the governor. Therefore when all the rest wondered at this, and the governor saw
                and passed by with his array, he stood fearlessly, shewing the readiness of us Christians.
                For, as I said before, he prayed himself to be a martyr, wherefore he seemed as one
                grieved that he had not borne his witness. But the Lord was keeping him for our profit and
                that of others, that he should become a teacher to many of the discipline which he had
                learned from the Scriptures. For many only beholding his manner of life were eager to be
              imitators
               209
               of his ways. So he again ministered as usual to the confessors, and as though he were
              their fellow captive he laboured in his ministry.
               47. And when at last the persecution ceased, and the blessed Bishop Peter [15] had
                borne his testimony; Antony departed, and again withdrew to his cell, and was there daily
                a martyr to his conscience, and contending in the conflicts of faith. And his discipline
                was much severer, for he was ever fasting, and he had a garment of hair on the inside,
                while the outside was skin, which he kept until his end. And he neither bathed his body
                with water to free himself from filth, nor did he ever wash his feet nor even endure so
                much as to put them into water, unless compelled by necessity. Nor did any one even see
              him unclothed, nor his body naked at all, except after his death, when he was buried.
               48. When therefore he had retired and determined to fix a time, after which neither to
                go forth himself nor admit anybody, Martinian, a military officer, came and disturbed
                Antony. For he had a daughter afflicted with an evil spirit. But when he continued for a
                long while knocking at the door, and asking him to come out and pray to God for his child,
                Antony, not bearing to open, looked out from above and said, 'Man, why dost thou call on
                me? I also am a man even as you. But if you believe on Christ whom I serve, go, and
                according as you believe, pray to God, and it shall come to pass.' Straightway, therefore,
                he departed, believing and calling upon Christ, and he received his daughter cleansed from
                the devil. Many other things also through Antony the Lord did, who saith, 'Seek and it
                shall be given unto you [16].' For many of the sufferers, when he would not open his door,
              slept outside his cell, and by their faith and sincere prayers were healed.
               49. But when he saw himself beset by many, and not suffered to withdraw himself
                according to his intent as he wished, fearing because of the signs which the Lord wrought
                by him, that either he should be puffed up, or that some other should think of him above
                what he ought to think, he considered and set off to go into the upper Thebaid, among
                those to whom he was unknown. And having received loaves from the brethren, he sat down by
                the bank of the river, looking whether a boat would go by, that, having embarked thereon,
                he might go up the river with them. While he was considering these things, a voice came to
                him from above, 'Antony, whither goest thou and wherefore?' But he no way disturbed, but
                as he had been accustomed to be called [16a] often thus, giving ear to it, answered,
                saying, 'Since the multitude permit me not to be still, I wish to go into the upper
                Thebaid on account of the many hindrances that come upon me here, and especially because
                they demand of me things beyond my power.' But the voice said unto him, 'Even though you
                should go into the Thebaid, or even though, as you have in mind, i you should go down to
                the Bucolia [17], you will have to endure more, aye, double the amount of toil. But if you
                wish really to be in quiet, depart now into the inner desert.' And when Antony said, 'Who
                will show me the way for I know it not?' immediately the voice pointed out to him Saracens
                about to go that way. So Antony approached, and drew near them, and asked that he might go
                with them into the desert. And they, as though they had been commanded by Providence,
                received him willingly. And having journeyed with them three days and three nights, he
                came to a very lofty mountain, and at the foot of the mountain ran a clear spring, whose
                waters were sweet and very cold; outside there was a plain and a few uncared-for palm
              trees.
               50. Antony then, as it were, moved by God, loved the place [18], for this was the spot
                which he who had spoken with him by the banks of the river had pointed out. So having
                first received loaves from his fellow travellers, he abode in the mountain alone, no one
                else being with him. And recognising it as his own home, he remained in that place for the
                future. But the Saracens, having seen the earnestness of Antony, purposely used to journey
                that way, and joyfully brought him loaves, while now and then the palm trees also afforded
                him a poor and frugal relish. But after this, the brethren learning of the place, like
                children mindful of their father, took care to send to him. But when Antony saw that the
                bread was the cause of trouble and hardships to some of them, to spare the monks this, he
                resolved to ask some of those who came to bring him a spade, an axe, and a little corn.
                And when these were brought, he went over the land round the mountain, and having found a
                small plot of suitable ground, tilled it; and having a plentiful supply of water for
                watering, he sowed. This doing year by year, he got his bread from thence, rejoicing that
                thus he would be troublesome to no one, and because he kept himself from being a burden to
                anybody. But after this, seeing again that people came, he cultivated a few pot-herbs,
              that he who came to him might have some slight solace after the labour
               210
               of that hard journey. At first, however, the wild beasts in the desert, coming because
                of the water, often injured his seeds and husbandry. But he, gently laving hold of one of
                them, said to them all, 'Why do you hurt me, when I hurt none of you? Depart, and in the
                name of the Lord come not nigh this spot.' And from that time forward, as though fearful
              of his command, they no more came near the place.
               51. So he was alone in the inner mountain, spending his time in prayer and discipline.
                And the brethren who served him asked that they might come every month and bring him
                olives, pulse and oil, for by now he was an old man. There then he passed his life, and
                endured such great wrestlings, 'Not against flesh and blood [19],' as it is written, but
                against opposing demons, as we learned from those who visited him. For there they heard
                tumults, many voices, and, as it were, the clash of arms. At night they saw the mountain
                become full of wild beasts, and him also fighting as though against visible beings, and
                praying against them. And those who came to him he encouraged, while kneeling he contended
                and prayed to the Lord. Surely it was a marvellous thing that a man, alone in such a
                desert, feared neither the demons who rose up against him, nor the fierceness of the
                four-footed beasts and creeping things, for all they were so many. But in truth, as it is
                written, 'He trusted in the Lord as Mount Sion [20],' with a mind unshaken and
                undisturbed; so that the demons rather fled from him, and the wild beasts, as it is
              written [21], 'kept peace with him.'
               52. The devil, therefore, as David says in the Psalms [1], observed Antony and gnashed
                his teeth against him. But Antony was consoled by the Saviour and continued unhurt by his
                wiles and varied devices. As he was watching in the night the devil sent wild beasts
                against him. And almost all the hyenas in that desert came forth from their dens and
                surrounded him; and he was in the midst, while each one threatened to bite. Seeing that it
                was a trick of the enemy he said to them all: 'If ye have received power against me I am
                ready to be devoured by you; but if ye were sent against me by demons, stay not, but
                depart, for I am a servant of Christ.' When Antony said this they fled, driven by that
              word as with a whip.
               53. A few days after, as he was working (for he was careful to work hard), some one
                stood at the door and pulled the plait which he was working, for he used to weave baskets,
                which he gave to those who came in return for what they brought him. And rising up he saw
                a beast like a man to the thighs but having legs and feet like those of an ass. And Antony
                only signed himself and said, 'I am a servant of Christ. If thou art sent against me,
                behold I am here.' But the beast together with his evil spirits fled, so that, through his
                speed, he fell and died. And the death of the beast was the fall of the demons. For they
              strove in all manner of ways to lead Antony from the desert and were not able.
               54. And once being asked by the monks to come down and visit them and their abodes
                after a time, he journeyed with those who came to him. And a camel carried the loaves and
                the water for them. For all that desert is dry, and there is no water at all that is fit
                to drink, save in that mountain from whence they drew the water, and in which Antony's
                cell was. So when the water failed them on their way, and the heat was very great, they
                all were in danger. For having gone round the neighbour-hood and finding no water, they
                could walk no further, but lay on the ground and despairing of themselves, let the camel
                go. But the old man seeing that they were all in jeopardy, groaning in deep grief,
                departed a little way from them, and kneeling down he stretched forth his hands and
                prayed. And immediately the Lord made water to well forth where he had stood praying, and
                so all drank and were revived. And having filled their bottles they sought the camel and
                found her, for the rope happened to have caught in a stone and so was held fast. Having
                led it and watered it they placed the bottles on its back and finished their journey in
                safety. And when he came to the outer cells all saluted him, looking on him as a father.
                And he too, as though bringing supplies from the mountain, entertained them with his words
                and gave them a share of help. And again there was joy in the mountains, zeal for
                improvement and consolation through their mutual faith. Antony also rejoiced when he
                beheld the earnestness of the monks, and his sister grown old in virginity, and that she
              herself also was the leader of other virgins.
               55. So after certain days he went in again to the mountain. And henceforth many
                resorted to him, and others who were suffering ventured to go in. To all the monks
                therefore who came to him, he continually gave this precept: 'Believe on the Lord and love
                Him; keep yourselves from filthy thoughts and fleshly pleasures, and as it is written in
                the Proverbs, be not deceived "by the fulness of the belly [a]." Pray
              continually; avoid vain-
               211
               glory; sing psalms before sleep and on awaking; hold in your heart the commandments of
                Scripture; be mindful of the works of the saints that your souls being put in remembrance
                of the commandments may be brought into harmony with the zeal of the saints.' And
                especially he counselled them to meditate continually on the apostle's word, 'Let not the
                sun go down upon your wrath? And he considered this was spoken of all commandments in
                common, and that not on wrath alone, but not on any other sin of ours, ought the sun to go
                down. For it was good and needful that neither the sun should condemn us for an evil by
                day nor the moon for a sin by night, or even for an evil thought. That this state may l be
                preserved in us it is good to hear the apostle and keep his words, for he says, 'Try your
                own selves and prove your own selves [4].' Daily, therefore, let each one take from
                himself the tale of his actions both by day and night; and if he have sinned, let him
                cease from it; while if he have not, let him not be boastful. But let him abide in that
                which is good, without being negligent, nor condemning his neighbours, nor justifying
                himself, 'until the Lord come who searcheth out hidden things [5],' as saith the blessed
                apostle Paul. For often unawares we do things that we know not of but the Lord seeth all
                things. Wherefore committing the judgment to Him, let us have sympathy one with another.
                Let us bear each other's burdens [6]: but let us examine our own selves and hasten to fill
                up that in which we are lacking. And as a safeguard against sin let the following be
                observed. Let us each one note and write down our actions and the impulses of our soul as
                though we were going to relate them to each other. And be assured that if we should be
                utterly ashamed to have them known, we shall abstain from sin and harbour no base thoughts
                in our mind. For who wishes to be seen while sinning? or who will not rather lie after the
                commission of a sin, through the wish to escape notice? As then while we are looking at
                one another, we would not commit carnal sin, so if we record our thoughts as though about
                to tell them to one another, we shall the more easily keep ourselves free from vile
                thoughts through shame lest they should be known. Wherefore let that which is written be
                to us in place of the eyes of our fellow hermits, that blushing as much to write as if we
                had been caught, we may never think of what is unseemly. Thus fashioning ourselves we
                shall be able to keep the body in subjection, to please the Lord, and to trample on the
              devices of the enemy.
               56. This was the advice he gave to those who came to him. And with those who suffered
                he sympathised and prayed. And oft-times the Lord heard him on behalf of many: yet he
                boasted not because he was heard, nor did he murmur if he were not. But always he gave the
                Lord thanks and besought the sufferer to be patient, and to know that healing belonged
                neither to him nor to man at all, but only to the Lord, who doeth good when and to whom He
                will. The sufferers therefore used to receive the words of the old man as though they were
                a cure, learning not to be downhearted but rather to be long-suffering. And those who were
              healed were taught not to give thanks to Antony but to God alone.
               57. Wherefore a man, Fronto by name, who was an officer of the Court and had a terrible
                disease, for he used to bite his own tongue and was in danger of injury to his eyes,
                having come to the mountain, asked Antony to pray for him. But Antony said to him, 'Depart
                and thou shalt be healed.' But when he was violent and remained within some days, Antony
                waited and said, 'If thou stayest here, thou canst not be healed. Go, and having come into
                Egypt thou shall see the sign wrought in thee.' And he believed and went. And as soon as
                he set eyes on Egypt his sufferings ceased, and the man became whole according to the word
              of Antony, which the Saviour had revealed to him in prayer.
               58. There was also a maiden from Busiris Tripolitana, who had a terrible and very
                hideous disorder. For the runnings of her eyes, nose, and ears fell to the ground and
                immediately became worms. She was paralysed also and squinted. Her parents having heard of
                monks going to Antony, and believing on the Lord who healed [7] the woman with the issue
                of blood, asked to be allowed, together with their daughter, to journey with them. And
                when they suffered them, the parents together with the girl, remained outside the mountain
                with Paphnutius, the confessor and monk; but the monks went in to Antony. And when they
                only wished to tell about the damsel, he anticipated them, and detailed both the
                sufferings of the child and how she journeyed with them. Then when they asked that she
                should be admitted, Antony did not allow it, but said, 'Go, and if she be not dead, you
                will find her healed: for the accomplishment of this is not mine, that she should come to
              me, wretched man that I am,
               212
               but her healing is the work of the Saviour, who in every place sheweth His pity to them
                that call upon Him. Wherefore the Lord hath inclined to her as she prayed, and His
                loving-kindness hath declared to me that He will heal the child where she now is.' So the
              wonder took place; and going out they found the parents rejoicing and the girl whole.
               59. But when two brethren were coming to him, the water failed on the way, and one died
                and the other was at the point of death, for he had no strength to go on, but lay upon the
                ground expecting to die. But Antony sitting in the mountain called two monks, who chanced
                to be there, and urged them saying, 'Take a pitcher of water and run on the road towards
                Egypt. For of two men who were coming, one is already dead and the other will die unless
                you hasten. For this has been revealed to me as I was praying.' The monks therefore went,
                and found one lying dead, whom they buried, and the other they restored with water and led
                him to the old man. For it was a day's journey [7a]. But if any one asks, why he did not
                speak before the other died, the question ought not to be asked. For the punishment of
                death was not Antony's but God's, who also judged the one and revealed the condition of
                the other. But the marvel here was only in the case of Antony: that he sitting in the
              mountain had his heart watchful, and had the Lord to show him things afar off.
               60. And this is so, for once again he was sitting on the mountain, and looking up saw
                in the air some one being borne upwards, and there was much joy among those who met him.
                Then wondering and deeming a company of that kind to be blessed, he prayed to learn what
                this might be. And immediately a voice came to him: 'This is the soul of Amun, the monk at
                Nitria.' Now Amun had persevered in the discipline up to old age; and the distance from
                Nitria to the mountain where Antony was, was thirteen days' journey. The companions of
                Antony therefore, seeing the old man amazed, asked to learn, and heard that Amun was just
                dead [8]. And he was well known, for he had stayed there very often, and many signs had
                been wrought by his means. And this is one of them. Once when he had need to cross the
                river called Lycus (now it was the season of the flood), he asked his comrade Theodorus to
                remain at a distance, that they should not see one another naked as they swam the water.
                Then when Theodorus was departed he again felt ashamed even to see himself naked. While,
                therefore, he was pondering filled with shame, on a sudden he was borne over to the other
                side. Theodorus, therefore, himself being a good man, approached, and seeing Amun across
                first without a drop of water falling from him, enquired how he had got over. And when he
                saw that Amun was unwilling to tell him, he held him by the feet and declared that he
                would not let him go before he had learned it from him. So Amun seeing the determination
                of Theodorus especially from what he had said, and having asked him to tell no man before
                his death, told him that he had been carried and placed on the further side. And that he
                had not even set foot on the water, nor was that possible for man, but for the Lord alone
                and those whom He permits, as He did for the great apostle Peter [9]. Theodorus therefore
                told this after the death of Amun. And the monks to whom Antony spoke concerning Amun's
                death marked the day; and when the brethren came up from Nitria thirty days after, they
                enquired of them and learned that Amun had fallen asleep at that day and hour in which the
                old man had seen his soul borne upwards. And both these and the others marvelled at the
                purity of Antony's soul, how he had immediately learned that which was taking place at a
              distance of thirteen days' journey, and had seen the soul as it was taken up.
               61. And Archelaus too, the Count, on a time having found him in the outer mountain,
                asked him merely to pray for Polycratia of Laodicea, an excellent and Christian [9a]
                maiden, for she suffered terribly in the stomach and side through over much discipline,
                and was altogether weakly of body. Antony prayed therefore, and the Count noted the day in
                which the prayer was made, and having departed to Laodicea he found the maiden whole. And
                having enquired when and on what day she was relieved of her infirmity, he produced the
                paper on which he had written the time of the prayer, and having read it he immediately
                shewed the writing on the paper. And all wondered when they knew that the Lord had
                relieved her of pain at the time when Antony was praying and invoking the goodness of the
              Saviour on her behalf.
               62. And concerning those who came to him, he often foretold some days or sometimes a
                month beforehand what was the cause of their coming. For some came only for the sake of
                seeing him, others through sickness, and others suffering from evil spirits. And all
              thought the labour of the journey neither trouble nor loss. For each one returned
               213
               aware that he had received benefit. But though saying such things and beholding such
                sights, he used to ask that no one should wonder at him for this; but should rather marvel
              at the Lord for having granted to us men to know Him as far as our powers extended.
               63. Afterwards, on another occasion, having descended to the outer cells, he was asked
                to enter a vessel and pray with the monks, and he alone perceived an exceedingly
                unpleasant smell. But those on board said that the stench arose from the fish and salt
                meat in the ship. He replied however, the smell was different from that; and while he was
                speaking, a youth with an evil spirit, who had come and hidden himself in the ship, cried
                out. But the demon being rebuked in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ departed from him,
              and the man became whole. And all knew that the evil smell arose from the demon.
               64. And another, a person of rank, came to him, possessed by a demon; and the demon was
                so terrible that the man possessed did not know that he was coming to Antony. But he even
                ate the excreta from his body. So those who brought him besought Antony to pray for him.
                And Antony pitying the young man prayed and kept watch with him all the night. And about
                dawn the young man suddenly attacked Antony and gave him a push. But when those who came
                with him were angry, Antony said, 'Be not angry with the young man, for it is not he, but
                the demon which is in him. And being rebuked and commanded to go into dry places, the
                demon became raging mad, and he has done this. Wherefore give thanks to the Lord, for his
                attack on me thus is a sign of the departure of the evil spirit.' When Antony had said
                this, straightway the young man had become whole, and having come at last to his right
              mind, knew where he was, and saluted the old man and gave thanks to God.
               65. And many monks have related with the greatest agreement and unanimity that many
                other such like things were done by him. But still these do not seem as marvellous as
                certain other things appear to be. For once, when about to eat, having risen up to pray
                about the ninth hour, he perceived that he was caught up in the spirit, and, wonderful to
                tell, he stood and saw himself, as it were, from outside himself, and that he was led in
                the air by certain ones. Next certain bitter and terrible beings stood in the air and
                wished to hinder him from passing through. But when his conductors opposed them, they
                demanded whether he was not accountable to them. And when they wished to sum up the
                account from his birth, Antony's conductors stopped them, saying, 'The Lord hath wiped out
                the sins from his birth, but from the time he became a monk, and devoted himself to God,
                it is permitted you to make a reckoning.' Then when they accused him and could not convict
                him, his way was free and unhindered. And immediately he saw himself, as it were, coming
                and standing by himself, and again he was Antony as before. Then forgetful of eating, he
                remained the rest of the day and through the whole of the night groaning and praying. For
                he was astonished when he saw against what mighty opponents our wrestling is, and by what
                labours we have to pass through the air. And he remembered that this is what the Apostle
                said, 'according to the prince of the power of the air [10].' For in it the enemy hath
                power to fight and to attempt to hinder those who pass through. Wherefore most earnestly
                he exhorted, 'Take up the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the
                evil day [11],' that the enemy, 'having no evil thing to say against us, may be ashamed
                [12].' And we who have learned this, let us be mindful of the Apostle when he says,
                'whether in the body I know not, or whether out of the body I know not; God knoweth [13].'
                But Paul was caught up unto the third heaven, and having heard things unspeakable he came
              down; while Antony saw that he had come to the air, and contended until he was free.
               66. And he had also this favour granted him. For as he was sitting alone on the
                mountain, if ever he was in perplexity in his meditations, this was revealed to him by
                Providence in prayer. And the happy man, as it is written, was taught of God [14]. After
                this, when he once had a discussion with certain men who had come to him concerning the
                state of the soul and of what nature its place will be after this life, the following
                night one from above called him, saying, 'Antony, rise, go out and look.' Having gone out
                therefore (for he knew whom he ought to obey) looking up, he beheld one standing and
                reaching to the clouds, tall, hideous, and fearful, and others ascending as though they
                were winged. And the figure stretched forth his hands, and some of those who were
                ascending were stayed by him, while others flew above, and having escaped heavenward, were
                borne aloft free from care. At such, therefore, the giant gnashed his teeth, but rejoiced
                over those who fell back. And forthwith a voice came to Antony, 'Understandest thou what
              thou seest?' And his understanding was
               214
               opened, and he understood that it was the passing of souls, and that the tall being who
                stood was the enemy who envies the faithful. And those whom he caught and stopped from
                passing through are accountable to him, while those whom he was unable to hold as they
                passed upwards had not been subservient to him. So having seen this, and as it were being
                reminded, he struggled the more daily to advance towards those things which were before.
                And these visions he was unwilling to tell, but as he spent much time in prayer, and was
                amazed, when those who were with him pressed him with questions and forced him, he was
                compelled to speak, as a father who cannot withhold ought from his children. And he
                thought that as his conscience was clear, the account would be beneficial for them, that
                they might learn that discipline bore good fruit, and that visions were oftentimes the
              solace of their labours.
               67. Added to this he was tolerant in disposition and humble in spirit. For though he
                was such a man, he observed the rule of the Church most rigidly, and was willing that all
                the clergy should be honoured above himself [17]. For he was not ashamed to bow his head
                to bishops and presbyters,and if ever a deacon came to him for help he discoursed with him
                on what was profitable, but gave place to him in prayer, not being ashamed to learn
                himself. For often he would ask questions, and desired to listen to those who were
                present, and if any one said anything that was useful he confessed that he was profited.
                And besides, his countenance had a great and wonderful grace. This gift also he had from
                the Saviour. For if he were present in a great company of monks, and any one who did not
                know him previously, wished to see him, immediately coming forward he passed by the rest,
                and hurried to Antony, as though attracted by his appearance. Yet neither in height nor
                breadth was he conspicuous above others, but in the serenity of his manner and the purity
                of his soul. For as his soul was free from disturbances, his outward appearance was calm;
                so from the joy of his soul he possessed a cheerful countenance, and from his bodily
                movements could be perceived the condition of his soul, as it is written, 'When the heart
                is merry the countenance is cheerful, but when it is sorrowful it is cast down [18].' Thus
                Jacob recognised the counsel Laban had in his heart, and said to his wives, 'The
                countenance of your father is not as it was yesterday and the day before [19].' Thus
                Samuel recognised David, for he had mirthful eyes, and teeth white as milk. Thus Antony
                was recognised, for he was never disturbed, for his soul was at peace; he was never
              downcast, for his mind was joyous.
               68. And he was altogether wonderful in faith and religious, for he never held communion
                with the Meletian schismatics, knowing their wickedness and apostacy from the beginning;
                nor had he friendly dealings with the Manichaeans or any other heretics; or, if he had,
                only as far as advice that they should change to piety. For he thought and asserted that
                intercourse with these was harmful and destructive to the saul. In the same manner also he
                loathed the heresy of the Arians, and exhorted all neither to approach them nor to bold
                their erroneous belief. And once when certain Arian madmen came to him, when he had
                questioned them and learned their impiety, he drove them from the mountain, saying that
              their words were worse than the poison of serpents.
               69. And once also the Arians having lyingly asserted that Antony's opinions were the
                same as theirs, he was displeased and wroth against them. Then being summoned by the
                bishops and all the brethren, he descended from the mountain, and having entered
                Alexandria [19a], he denounced the Arians, saying that their heresy was the last of all
                and a forerunner of Antichrist. And he taught the people that the Son of God was not a
                created being, neither had He come into being from non-existence, but that He was the
                Eternal Word and Wisdom of the Essence of the Father. And therefore it was impious to say,
                'there was a time when He was not,' for the Word was always co-existent with the Father.
                Wherefore have no fellowship with the most impious Arians. For there is no communion
                between light and darkness [20]. For you are good Christians, but they, when they say that
                the Son of the Father, the Word of God, is a created being, differ in nought from the
                heathen, since they worship that which is created, rather than God the creator [1]. But
                believe ye that the Creation itself is angry with them because they number the Creator,
                the Lord of all, by whom all things came into being, with those things which were
              originated.
               70. All the people, therefore, rejoiced when they heard the anti-Christian heresy
                anathematised by such a man. And all the people in the city ran together to see Antony;
                and the Greeks and those who are called their Priests, came into the church, saying, 'We
                ask to see the man of God,' for so they all called him. For in that place also the Lord
                cleansed many of demons, and healed those who were mad. And many Greeks asked that they
                might even but touch the old man, believing that they should be profited. Assuredly as
                many became Christians in those few days as one would have seen made in a year. Then when
                some thought that he was troubled by the crowds, and on this account turned them all away
                from him, he said, undisturbedly, that there were not more of them than of the demons with
              whom he wrestled in the mountain.
               71. But when he was departing, and we were setting him forth on his way, as we [2]
                arrived at the gate a woman from behind cried out, 'Stay, thou man of God, my daughter is
                grievously vexed by a devil. Stay, I beseech thee, lest I too harm myself with running.'
                And the old man when he heard her, and was asked by us, willingly stayed. And when the
                woman drew near, the child was cast on the ground. But when Antony had prayed and called
                upon the name of Christ, the child was raised whole, for the unclean spirit was gone
                forth. And the mother blessed God, and all gave thanks. And Antony himself also rejoiced,
              departing to the mountain as though it were to his own home.
               72. And Antony also was exceeding prudent, and the wonder was that although he had not
                learned letters, he was a ready-witted and sagacious man. At all events two Greek
                philosophers once came, thinking they could try their skill on Antony; and he was in the
                outer mountain, and having recognised who they were from their appearance, he came to them
                and said to them by means of an interpreter, 'Why, philosophers, did ye trouble yourselves
                so much to come to a foolish man?' And when they said that he was not a foolish man, but
                exceedingly prudent, he said to them, ' If you came to a foolish man, your labour is
                superfluous; but if you think me prudent become as I am, for we ought to imitate what is
                good. And if I had come to you I should have imitated you; but if you to me, become as I
                am, for I am a Christian.' But they departed with wonder, for they saw that even demons
              feared Antony.
               73. And again others such as these met him in the outer mountain and thought to mock
                [3], him because he had not learned letters. And Antony said to them, 'What say ye? which
                is first, mind or letters? And which is the cause of which--mind of letters or letters of
                mind?' And when they answered mind is first and the inventor of letters, Antony said,
                'Whoever, therefore, hath a sound mind hath not need of letters.' This answer amazed both
                the bystanders and the philosophers, and they departed marvelling that they had seen so
                much understanding in an ignorant man. For his manners were not rough as though he bad
                been reared in the mountain and there grown old, but graceful and polite, and his speech
                was seasoned with the divine salt, so that no one was envious, but rather all rejoiced
              over him who visited him.
               74. After this again certain others came; and these were men who were deemed wise among
                the Greeks, and they asked him a reason for our faith in Christ. But when they attempted
                to dispute concerning the preaching of the divine Cross and meant to mock, Antony stopped
                for a little, and first pitying their ignorance, said, through an interpreter, who could
                skilfully interpret his words, 'Which is more beautiful, to confess the Cross or to
                attribute to those whom you call gods adultery and the seduction of boys? For that which
                is chosen by us is a sign of courage and a sure token of the contempt of death, while
                yours are the passions of licentiousness. Next, which is better, to say that the Word of
                God was not changed, but, being the same, He took a human body for the salvation and
                well-being of man, that having shared in human birth He might make man partake in the
                divine and spiritual nature [4]; or to liken the divine to senseless animals and
                consequently to worship four-footed beasts, creeping things and the likenesses of men? For
                these things, are the objects of reverence of you wise men. But how do you dare to mock
                us, who say that Christ has appeared as man, seeing that you, bringing the soul from
                heaven, assert that it has strayed and fallen from the vault of the sky into body [5]? And
                would that you had said that it had fallen into human body alone, and not asserted that it
                passes and changes into four-footed beasts and creeping things. For our faith declares
                that the coming of Christ was for the salvation of men. But you err because you speak of
                soul as not generated. And we, considering the power and loving-kindness of Providence,
                think that the coming of Christ in the flesh was not impossible with God. But you,
              although calling the soul the likeness of Mind [6], connect it with falls and
               216
               feign in your myths that it is changeable, and consequently introduce the idea that
                Mind itself is changeable by reason of the soul. For whatever is the nature of a likeness,
                such necessarily is the nature of that of which it is a likeness. But whenever you think
                such a thought concerning Mind, remember that you blaspheme even the Father of Mind
              Himself [7].
               75. But concerning the Cross, which would you say to be the better, to bear it, when a
                plot is brought about by wicked men, nor to be in fear of death brought about under any
                form whatever [8]; or to prate about the wanderings of Osiris and Isis, the plots of
                Typhon, the flight of Cronos, his eating his children and the slaughter of his father. For
                this is your wisdom. But how, if you mock the Cross, do you not marvel at the
                resurrection? For the same men who told us of the latter wrote the former, Or why when you
                make mention of the Cross are you silent about the dead who were raised, the blind who
                received their sight, the paralytics who were healed, the lepers who were cleansed, the
                walking upon the sea, and the rest of the signs and wonders, which shew that Christ is no
                longer a man but God? To me you seem to do yourselves much injustice and not to have
                carefully read our Scriptures. But read and see that the deeds of Christ prove Him to be
              God come upon earth for the salvation of men.
               76. But do you tell us your religious beliefs. What can you say of senseless creatures
                except senselessness and ferocity? But if, as I hear, you wish to say that these things
                are spoken of by you as legends, and you allegorize the rape of the maiden Persephone of
                the earth; the lameness of Hephaestus of fire; and allegorize the air as Hera, the sun as
                Apollo, the moon as Artemis, and the sea as Poseidon; none the less, you do not worship
                God Himself, but serve the creature rather than God who created all things. For if because
                creation is: beautiful you composed such legends, still it was fitting that you should
                stop short at admiration and not make gods of the things created; so that you should not
                give the honour of the Creator to that which is created. Since, if you do, it is time for
                you to divert the honour of the master builder to the house built by him; and of the
                general to the soldier. What then can you reply to these things, that we may know whether
              the Cross hath anything worthy of mockery?'
               77. But when they were at a loss, turning hither and thither, Antony smiled and
                said--again through an interpreter--'Sight itself carries the conviction of these things.
                But as you prefer to lean upon demonstrative arguments, and as you, having this art, wish
                us also not to worship God, until after such proof, do you tell first how things in

                general and specially the recognition of God are accurately known. Is it through
                demonstrative argument or the working of faith? And which is better, faith which comes
                through the inworking (of God) or demonstration by arguments?' And when they answered that
                faith which comes through the inworking was better and was accurate knowledge, Antony
                said, 'You have answered well, for faith arises from disposition of soul, but dialectic
                from the skill of its inventors. Wherefore to those who have the inworking through faith,
                demonstrative argument is needless, or even superfluous. For what we know through faith
                this you attempt to prove through words, and often you are not even able to express what
                we understand. So the inworking through faith is better and stronger than your
              professional arguments.
               78. 'We Christians therefore hold the mystery not in the wisdom of Greek arguments, but
                in the power of faith richly supplied to us by God through Jesus Christ. And to show that
                this statement is true, behold now, without having learned letters, we believe in God,
                knowing through His works His providence over all things. And to show that our faith is
                effective, so now we are supported by faith in Christ, but you by professional
                logomachies. The portents of the idols among you are being done away, but our faith is
                extending everywhere. You by your arguments and quibbles have converted none from
                Christianity to Paganism. We, teaching the faith on Christ, expose your superstition,
                since all recognise that Christ is God and the Son of God. You by your eloquence do not
                hinder the teaching of Christ. But we by the mention of Christ crucified put all demons to
                flight, whom you fear as if they were gods. Where the sign of the Cross is [9], magic is
              weak and witchcraft has no strength.
               79. ' Tell us therefore where your oracles are now? Where are the charms of the
                Egyptians? Where the delusions of the magicians? When did all these things cease and grow
                weak except when the Cross of Christ arose? Is It then a fit subject for mockery, and not
                rather the things brought to nought by it, and convicted of weakness? For this is a
                marvellous thing, that your religion was never persecuted, but even was honoured by men in
              every city, while
               217
               the followers of Christ are persecuted, and still our side flourishes and multiplies
                over yours. What is yours, though praised and honoured, perishes, while the faith and
                teaching of Christ, though mocked by you and often persecuted by kings, has filled the
                world. For when has the knowledge of God so shone forth? or when has self-control and the
                excellence of virginity appeared as now? or when has death been so despised except when
                the Cross of Christ has appeared? And this no one doubts when he sees [10] the martyr
                despising death for the sake of Christ, when he sees for Christ's sake the virgins of the
              Church keeping themselves pure and undefiled.
               80. 'And these signs are sufficient to prove that the faith of Christ alone is the true
                religion. But see! you still do not believe and are seeking for arguments. We however make
                our proof "not in the persuasive words of Greek wisdom [11]" as our teacher has
                it, but we persuade by the faith which manifestly precedes argumentative proof. Behold
                there are here some vexed with demons ;'--now there were certain who had come to him very
                disquieted by demons, and bringing them into the midst he said,--'Do you cleanse them
                either by arguments and by whatever art or magic you choose, calling upon your idols, or
                if you are unable, put away your strife with us and you shall see the power of the Cross
                of Christ.' And having said this he called upon Christ, and signed the sufferers two or
                three times with the sign of the Cross. And immediately the men stood up whole, and in
                their right mind, and forthwith gave thanks unto the Lord. And the philosophers, as they
                are called, wondered, and were astonished exceedingly at the understanding of the man and
                at the sign which had been wrought. But Antony said, 'Why marvel ye at this? We are not
                the doers of these things, but it is Christ who worketh them by means of those who believe
                on Him. Believe, therefore, also yourselves, and you shall see that with us there is no
                trick of words, but faith through love which is wrought in us towards Christ; which if you
                yourselves should obtain you will no longer seek demonstrative arguments, but will
                consider faith in Christ sufficient.' These are the words of Antony. And they marvelling
                at this also, saluted him and departed, confessing the benefit they had received from him
              [12].
               81. And the fame of Antony came even unto kings. For Constantine Augustus, and his sons
                Constantius and Constans the Augusti wrote letters to him, as to a father, and begged an
                answer from him. But he made nothing very much of the letters, nor did he rejoice at the
                messages. but was the same as he had been before the Emperors wrote to him. But when they
                brought him the letters he called the monks and said, 'Do not be astonished if an emperor
                writes to us, for he is a man; but rather wonder that God wrote the Law for men and has
                spoken to us [13] through His own Son.' And so he was unwilling to receive the letters,
                saying that he did not know how to write an answer to such things. But being urged by the
                monks because the emperors were Christians, and lest they should take offence on the
                ground that they had been spurned, he consented that they should be read, and wrote an
                answer approving them because they worshipped Christ, and giving them counsel on things
                pertaining to salvation: 'not to think much of the present, but rather to remember the
                judgment that is coming, and to know that Christ alone was the true and Eternal King.' He
                begged them to be merciful and to give heed to justice and the poor. And they having
                received the answer rejoiced. Thus he was dear to all, and all desired to consider him as
              a father.
               82. Being known to be so great a man, therefore, and having thus given answers to those
                who visited him, he returned again to the inner mountain, and maintained his wonted
                discipline. And often when people-came to him, as he was sitting or walking, as it is
                written in Daniel [14], he became dumb, and after a season he resumed the thread of what
                he had been saying before to the brethren who were with him. And his companions perceived
                that he was seeing a vision. For often when he was on the mountains he saw what was
                happening in Egypt, and told it to Sera-pion the bishop [15], who was indoors with him,
                and who saw that Antony was wrapped in a vision. Once as he was sitting and working, he
                fell, as it were, into a trance, and groaned much at what he saw. Then after a time,
                having turned to the bystanders with groans and trembling, he prayed, and falling on his
                knees remained so a long time. And having arisen the old man wept. His companions,
                therefore, trembling and terrified, desired to learn from him what it was. And they
                troubled him much, until he was forced to speak. And with many groans he spake as follows:
                'O, my children, it were better to die before what has appeared in the vision come to
                pass.' And when again they asked him, having burst into tears, he said, 'Wrath is about to
                seize the Church, and it is on the point of being given up to men who are like senseless
                beasts. For I saw the table of the Lord's House, and mules standing around it on all sides
                in a ring, and kicking the things therein, just like a herd kicks when it leaps in
                confusion. And you saw,' said he, 'how I groaned, for I heard a voice saying, "My
                altar shall be defiled."' These things the old man saw, and after two years the
                present [16] inroad of the Arians and the plunder of the churches took place, when they
                violently carried off the vessels, and made the heathen carry them; and when they forced
                the heathen from the prisons to join in their services, and in their presence did upon the
                Table as they would. Then we all understood that these kicks of the mules signified to
                Antony what the Arians, senselessly like beasts, are now doing. But when he saw this
                vision, he comforted those with him, saying, 'Be not downcast, my children; for as the
                Lord has been angry, so again will He heal us, and the Church shall soon again receive her
                own order, and shall shine forth as she is wont. And you shall behold the persecuted
                restored, and wickedness again withdrawn to its own hiding-place, and pious faith speaking
                boldly in every place with all freedom. Only defile [17] not yourselves with the Arians,
                for their teaching is not that of the Apostles, but that of demons and their father the
                devil; yea, rather, it is barren and senseless, and without light understanding, like the
              senselessness of these mules.'
               83. Such are the words of Antony, and we ought not to doubt whether such marvels were
                wrought by the hand of a man. For it is the promise of the Saviour, when He saith, 'If ye
                have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, remove hence and it
                shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto yours [18].' And again, 'Verily,
                verily, I say unto you, if ye shall ask the father in My name He will give it you. Ask and
                ye shall receive [19].' And He himself it is who saith to His disciples and to all who
                believe on Him, ' Heal the sick, cast out demons; freely ye have received, freely give
              [20].'
               84. Antony, at any rate, healed not by commanding, but by prayer and speaking the name
                of Christ. So that it was clear to all that it was not he himself who worked, but the Lord
                who showed mercy by his means and healed the sufferers. But Antony's part was only prayer
                and discipline, for the sake of which he stayed in the mountain, rejoicing in the
                contemplation of divine things, but grieving when troubled by much people, and dragged to
                the outer mountain. For all judges used to ask him to come down, because it was impossible
                for them to enter on account of their following of litigants. But nevertheless they asked
                him to come that they might but see him. When therefore he avoided it and refused to go to
                them, they remained firm, and sent to him all the more the prisoners under charge of
                soldiers, that on account of these he might come down. Being forced by necessity, and
                seeing them lamenting, he came into the outer mountain, and again his labour was not
                unprofitable. For his coming was advantageous and serviceable to many; and he was of
                profit to the judges, counselling them to prefer justice to all things; to fear God, and
                to know, 'that with what judgment they judged, they should be judged [1].' But he loved
              more than all things his sojourn in the mountain.
               85. At another time, suffering the same compulsion at the hands of them who had need,
                and after many entreaties from the commander of the soldiers, he came down, and when he
                was come he spoke to them shortly of the things which make for salvation, and concerning
                those who wanted him, and was hastening away. But when the duke, as he is called,
                entreated him to stay, he replied that he could not linger among them, and persuaded him
              by a pretty simile, say-
               219
               ing, 'Fishes, if they remain long on dry land, die. And so monks lose their strength if
                they loiter among you and spend their time with you. Wherefore as fish must hurry to the
                sea, so must we hasten to the mountain. Lest haply if we delay we forget the things within
                us.' And the general having heard this and many other things from him, was amazed and
                said, 'Of a truth this man is the servant of God. For, unless he were beloved of God,
              whence could an ignorant man have such great understanding?'
               86. And a certain general, Balacius by name, persecuted us Christians bitterly on
                account of his regard for the Arians--that name of ill-omen. And as his ruthlessness, was
                so great that he beat virgins, and stripped and scourged monks, Antony at this time wrote
                a letter as follows, and sent it to him. 'I see wrath coming upon thee, wherefore cease to
                persecute the Christians, lest haply wrath catch hold of thee, for even now it is on the
                point of coming upon thee[2].' But Balacius laughed and threw the letter on the ground,
                and spit on it, and insulted the bearers, bidding them tell this to Antony: 'Since thou
                takest thought for the monks, soon I will come after thee also.' And five days had not
                passed before wrath came upon him. For Balacius and Nestorius, the Prefect of Egypt[3],
                went forth to the first halting-place from Alexandria, which is called Chaereu, and both
                were on horseback, and the horses belonged to Balacius, and were the quietest of all his
                stable. But they had not gone far towards the place when the horses began to frisk with
                one another as they are wont to do; and suddenly the quieter, on which Nestorius sat[4],
                with a bite dismounted Balacius, and attacked him, and tore his thigh so badly with its
                teeth that he was borne straight back to the city, and in three days died. And all
              wondered because what Antony had foretold had been so speedily fulfilled.
               87. Thus, therefore, he warned the cruel. But the rest who came to him he so instructed
                that they straightway forgot their lawsuits, and felicitated those who were in retirement
                from the world. And he championed those who were wronged in such a way that you would
                imagine that he, and not the others, was the sufferer. Further, he was able to be of such
                use to all, that many soldiers and men who had great possessions laid aside the burdens of
                life, and became monks for the rest of their days. And it was as if a physician had been
                given by God to Egypt. For who in grief met Antony and did not return rejoicing? Who came
                mourning for his dead and did not forthwith put off his sorrow? Who came in anger and was
                not converted to friendship? What poor and low-spirited man met him who, hearing him and
                looking upon him, did not despise wealth and console himself in his poverty? What monk,
                having being neglectful, came to him and became not all the stronger? What young man
                having come to the mountain and seen Antony, did not forthwith deny himself pleasure and
                love temperance? Who when tempted by a demon, came to him and did not find rest? And who
              came troubled with doubts and did not get quietness of mind?
               88. For this was the wonderful thing in Antony's discipline, that, as I said before,
                having the gift of discerning spirits, he recognised their movements, and was not ignorant
                whither any one of them turned his energy and made his attack. And not only was he not
                deceived by them himself, but cheering those who were troubled with doubts, he taught them
                how to defeat their plans, telling them of the weakness and craft of those who possessed
                them. Thus each one, as though prepared by him for battle, came down from the mountain,
                braving the designs of the devil and his demons. How many maidens who had suitors, having
                but seen Antony from afar, remained maidens for Christ's sake. And people came also from
                foreign parts to him, and like all others, having got some benefit, returned, as though
                set forward by a father. And certainly when he died, all as having been bereft of a
                father, consoled themselves solely by their remembrances of him, preserving at the same
              time his counsel and advice.
               89. It is worth while that I should relate, and that you, as you wish it, should hear
                what his death was like. For this end of his is worthy of imitation. According to his
                custom he visited the monks in the outer mountain, and having learned from Providence that
                his own end was at hand, he said to the brethren, 'This is my last visit to you which I
                shall make. And I shall be surprised if we see each other again in this life. At length
                the time of my departure is at hand, for I am near a hundred and five years old.' And when
                they heard it they wept, and embraced, and kissed the old man. But he, as though sailing
                from a foreign city to his own, spoke joyously, and exhorted them 'Not to grow idle in
                their labours, nor to become faint in their training, but to live as though dying daily.
                And as he had said before, zealously to guard the soul from foul thoughts, eagerly to
              imitate the Saints, and to have nought to do with the Meletian
               220
               schismatics, for you know their wicked and profane character. Nor have any fellowship
                with the Arians, for their impiety is clear to all. Nor be disturbed if you see the judges
                protect them, for it shall cease, and their pomp is mortal and of short duration.
                Wherefore keep yourselves all the more untainted by them, and observe the traditions of
                the fathers, and chiefly the holy faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, which you have learned
              from the Scripture, and of which you have often been put in mind by me.'
               90. But when the brethren were urging him to abide with them and there to die, he
                suffered. it not for many other reasons, as he showed by keeping silence, and especially
                for this:--The Egyptians are wont to honour with funeral rites, and to wrap in linen
                cloths at death the bodies of good men, and especially of the holy martyrs; and not to
                bury them underground, but to place them on couches, and to keep them in their houses,
                thinking in this to honour the departed. And Antony often urged the bishops to give
                commandment to the people on this matter. In like manner he taught the laity and reproved
                the women, saying, 'that this thing was neither lawful nor holy at all. For the bodies of
                the patriarchs and prophets are until now preserved in tombs, and the very body of the
                Lord was laid in a tomb, and a stone was laid upon it, and hid it until He rose on the
                third day[4a].' And thus saying, he showed that he who did not bury the bodies of the dead
                after death transgressed the law, even though they were sacred. For what is greater or
                more sacred than the body of the Lord? Many therefore having heard, henceforth buried the
              dead underground, and gave thanks to the Lord that they had been taught rightly.
               91. But he, knowing the custom, and fearing that his body would be treated this way,
                hastened, and having bidden farewell to the monks in the outer mountain entered the inner
                mountain, where he was accustomed to abide. And after a few months he fell sick. Having
                summoned those who were there--they were two in number who had remained in the mountain
                fifteen years, practising the discipline and attending on Antony on account of his age--he
                said to them, 'I, as it is written[5], go the way of the fathers, for I perceive that I am
                called by the Lord, And do you be watchful and destroy not your long discipline, but as
                though now making a beginning, zealously preserve your determination. For ye know the
                treachery of the demons, how fierce they are, but how little power they have Where fore
                fear them not, but rather ever breathe Christ, and trust Him. Live as though dying daily.
                Give heed to yourselves, and remember the admonition you have heard from me. Have no
                fellowship with the schismatics, nor any dealings at all with the heretical Arians. For
                you know how I shunned them on account of their hostility to Christ, and the strange
                doctrines of their heresy. Therefore be the more earnest always to be followers first of
                God and then of the Saints; that after death they also may receive you as well-known
                friends into the eternal habitations. Ponder over these things and think of them, and if
                you have any care for me and are mindful of me as of a father, suffer no one to take my
                body into Egypt, lest haply they place me in the houses[6], for to avoid this I entered
                into the mountain and came here. Moreover you know how I always put to rebuke those who
                had this custom, and exhorted them to cease from it. Bury my body, therefore, and hide it
                underground yourselves, and let my words be observed by you that no one may know the
                place[6a] but you alone. For at the resurrection of the dead I shall receive it
                incorruptible from the Saviour. And divide my garments. To Athanasius the bishop give one
                sheepskin and the garment whereon I am laid, which he himself gave me new, but which with
                me has grown old. To Serapion the bishop give the other sheepskin, and keep the hair
                garment yourselves[7]. For the rest fare ye well, my children, for Antony is departing,
              and is with you no more.'
               92. Having said this, when they had kissed him, he lifted up his feet, and as though he
                saw friends coming to him and was glad because o them--for as he lay his countenance
                appeared joyful--he died and was gathered to the fathers. And they afterward, according to
                his commandment, wrapped him up and buried him, hiding his body underground. And no one
                knows to this day where it was buried, save those two only. But each of those who received
                the sheepskin of the blessed Antony and the garment worn by him guards it as a precious
                treasure. For even to look on them is as it were to behold Antony; and he who is clothed
              in them seems with joy to bear his admonitions.
               93. This is the end of Antony's life in the body
               221
               and the above was the beginning of the discipline. Even if this account is small
                compared with his merit, still from this reflect how great Antony, the man of God, was.
                Who from his youth to so great an age preserved a uniform zeal for the discipline, and
                neither through old age was subdued by the desire of costly food, nor through the
                infirmity of his body changed the fashion of his clothing, nor washed even his feet with
                water, and yet remained entirely free from harm. For his eyes were undimmed and quite
                sound and he saw clearly; of his teeth he had not lost one, but they had become worn to
                the gums through the great age of the old man. He remained strong both in hands and feet;
                and while all men were using various foods, and washings and divers garments, he appeared
                more cheerful and of greater strength. And the fact that his fame has been blazoned
                everywhere; that all regard him with wonder, and that those who have never seen him long
                for him, is clear proof of his virtue and God's love of his soul. For not from writings,
                nor from worldly wisdom, nor through any art, was Antony renowned, but solely from his
                piety towards God. That this was the gift of God no one will deny. For from whence into
                Spain and into Gaul, how into Rome and Africa, was the man heard of who abode hidden in a
                mountain, unless it was God who maketh His own known everywhere, who also promised this to
                Antony at the beginning? For even if they work secretly, even if they wish to remain in
                obscurity, yet the Lord shows them as lamps to lighten all, that those who hear may thus
                know that the precepts of God are able to make men prosper and thus be zealous in the path
              of virtue.
               94. Read these words, therefore, to the rest of the brethren that they may learn what
                the life of monks ought to be; and may believe that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
                glorifies those who glorify Him: and leads those who serve Him unto the end, not only to
                the kingdom of heaven, but here also--even though they hide themselves and are desirous of
                withdrawing from the world--makes them illustrious and well known everywhere on account of
                their virtue and the help they render others. And if need be, read this among the heathen,
                that even in this way they may learn that our Lord Jesus Christ is not only God and the
                Son of God, but also that the Christians who truly serve Him and religiously believe on
                Him, prove, not only that the demons, whom the Greeks themselves think to be gods, are no
                gods, but also tread them under foot and put them to flight, as deceivers and corrupters
              of mankind, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

             This text is part of the  Internet
              Medieval Source Book . The Sourcebook is a collection of public domain and
              copy-permitted texts related to medieval and Byzantine history.
             Unless otherwise indicated the specific electronic form of the document is copyright.
              Permission is granted for electronic copying, distribution in print form for educational
              purposes and personal use. If you do reduplicate the document, indicate the source. No
              permission is granted for commercial use.
             Â©Paul Halsall Jan 1996, updated, November, 1998


  The  Internet Medieval Sourcebook  is part of the   Internet History Sourcebooks Project   .  The Internet History Sourcebooks Project is located at the  History Department  of   Fordham University , New York. The Internet
     Medieval Sourcebook, and other medieval components of the project, are located at
     the  Fordham University Center
       for Medieval Studies .The IHSP recognizes the contribution of Fordham University, the
     Fordham University History Department, and the Fordham Center for Medieval Studies in
     providing web space and server support for the project. The IHSP is a project independent of Fordham University.  
     Although the IHSP seeks to follow all applicable copyright law, Fordham University is not
     the institutional owner, and is not liable as the result of any legal action.

     ©   Site Concept and Design:  Paul Halsall       created 26 Jan 1996: latest revision 7 July  2026      [ CV ]
