This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google” books 

http://books.google.com 





Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE 

TEMPLE 

CLASSICS 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

Edited by 
F. S. ELLIS 


Digitized by V^iOOQlC 



Digitized by CiOtK I C 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 




pGOLDEM 
LEGEND 
RELIVES 

SffiSAINTS 
“ENGLISHED! 
k WILLIAM 
CAXTON 

ivoLryo® 


rMDCCCC • P UBL1SH £D * BY* JI'M'DfiNT* 
^ND*CO: A1/DIK&* HOU£e** LOJS&ON 'W*C* 


Digitized by 


Google 


CONTENTS OF VOL. 

II 

PAGE 

The History of Joshua, . 

• 

I 

„ „ Saul, . 


2 

„ „ David, . 


26 

,, ,, Solomon, 


40 

,, ,, Rehoboam, . 


5 1 

,, ,, Job, . . . 


5 2 

>» » Tobit, ... 


57 

,, ,, Judith, • . . 


77 

The Life of S. Andrew, 


94 x 

,, ,, S. Nicholas, . , 


109 x 

The Feast of the Conception of our Lady, 
The Lives of SS. Gentian, Fulcian, and 

^122 

Victorice, .... 


129 

The Life of S. Lucy, . 


13° > 

,, ,, S. Nicasius, 


136 

„ „ S. Thomas the Apostle, 


138 

„ ,, S. Anastasia, 


T 49 

„ ,, S. Eugenia, 


Mi 

,, ,, S. Stephen, . . 


152 

„ ,, S. John the Evangelist, 


161 

The History of the Holy Innocents, 


176 

The Life of S. Thomas of Canterbury, 


182 

,, ,, S. Silvester, . . 


197 

VOL. II. A > \ _ 

v 533963 . 

O' 

A 




THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life of S. Paul the first Hermit, 

PAGE 

204 


„ „ S. Remigius, 

209X 


„ „ S. Hilary, 

2i 3 ; 


,, S. Firmin, 

216 


„ „ S. Macarius, 

OC 


„ ,, S. Felix, . 

221 

, 

,, „ S. Marcel, 

223 

i 

„ „ S. Anthony, 

224> 

i 

,, S. Fabian, 

23I 


„ ,, S. Sebastian, 

232 

■A' 

„ „ S. Agnes, 

245 > 

jfh 

„ „ S. Vincent, 

252'* 

if 

,, ,, S. Basil, • • • • 

258 

ft 

,, „ S. John the Almoner, 

268 

k 

The Conversion of S. Paul, . 

279 

'il 

Glossary, ...... 

284 

1; 

,s\ 


tl 




THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The History of Joshua 

After Moses, Joshua was duke and leader of the The 
children of Israel, and brought them into the land ^istory 
of behest, and did many great battles. For whom J oshua 
God showed many great marvels and in especial 
one ; that was that the sun stood still at his request, 
till he had overcome his enemies, by the space of a 
day. And our Lord, when he fought, sent down 
such hail-stones that slew more of his enemies with 
the stones than with man’s hand. 

Joshua was a noble man and governed well 
Israel, and divided the land unto the twelve tribes 
by lot. And when he was an hundred and ten 
years old he died. And divers dukes after him 
judged and deemed Israel, of whom be noble 
histories, as of Jephthah, Gideon, and Sampson, 
which I pass over unto the histories of the kings, 
which is read in holy church from the first Sunday 
after Trinity Sunday, unto the first Sunday of 
* August. And in the month of August is read the 
Book of Sapience, and in the month of September 
be read the histories of Job, of Tobit, and of 
Judith, and in October the history of the Macca- 
bees, and in November the book of Ezechiel and 
his visions. And in December the history of 
Advent, and the boflf^qf ^m^Iki^o Christmas 


by-Google 



2 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The and after the feast of Epiphany unto Septuagesima 
History be read the Epistles of Paul. And this is the 
of Saul rv j e 0 f temporal through the year, etc. 


The History of Saul. 

The first Sunday after Trinity Sunday unto the first 
Sunday of the month of August is read the Book 
of Kings. 

This history maketh mention that there was a 
man named Elkanah which had two. wives, that 
one was named Hannah, and the name of the 
second Peninnah. Peninnah had children and 
Hannah had none but was barren. The good 
man at such days as he was bounden, went to his 
city for to make his sacrifice and worship God. 
In this time Hophni and Phineas sons of Eli, 
the great priest, were priests of our Lord. This 
Elkanah gave to Peninnah at such times as he 
offered, to her sons and daughters, certain parts, 
and unto Hannah he gave but one part. Peninnah 
did much sorrow and reproof to Hannah because 
she had had no children, and thus did every year, 
and provoked her to wrath, but she wept for 
sorrow and ate no meat. To whom Elkanah her 
husband said : Hannah, why weepest thou ? and 
wherefore eatest thou not ? Why is thine heart 
put to affliction ? Am I not better to thee than 
ten sons? Then Hannah arose after she had 
eaten and drunk in Shilo and went to pray unto 
our Lord, making to him a vow if that she might 
have a son she should offer him to our Lord. 
Eli that time sat tofore the posts of the house of 
our Lord. And Hannah besought and prayed 
our Lord, making to him a vow, if that she might 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


3 


have a son she should offer him to our Lord. The 
And it was so that she prayed so heartily in her Histoi 
thought and mind, that her lips moved not , 0 
wherefore Eli bare her on hand that she was 
drunk. And she said : Nay, my Lord, I am a 
sorrowful woman, I have drunken no wine ne drink 
that may cause me to be drunken, but I have 
made my prayers, and cast my soul in the sight of 
Almighty God. Repute me not as one of the 
daughters of Belial, for the prayer that I have 
made and spoken yet is of the multitude of the 
heaviness and sorrow of my heart. Then Eli the 
priest said to her: Go in peace, the God of 
Israel give to thee the petition of thy heart for 
that thou hast prayed him. And she said: 

Would God that thy handservant might find 
grace in thy sight. And so she departed, and on 
the morn they went home again in to Ramatha. 

After this our Lord remembered her, and Elkanah 
knew her, and she conceived, and at time accus- 
tomed brought forth and bare a fair son and 
named him Samuel for so much as she asked him 
of our Lord. Wherefore Elkanah, her husband, 
went and offered a solemn sacrifice and his vow 
accomplished, but Hannah ascended not with him. 

She said to her husband that she would not go till 
her child were weaned and taken from the pap. 

And after when Samuel was weaned, and was an 
infant, the mother took him, and three calves and 
three measures of meal, and a bottle of wine, and 
brought him unto the house of our Lord in Shilo 
and sacrificed that calf and offered the child to 
Eli, and told to Eli that she was the woman that 
prayed our Lord for that child. And there 
Hannah worshipped our Lord and thanked him, 
and there made this psalm which is one of the 


Digitized by G ogle 



4 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The canticles : Exultavit cor meum in domino, et 
history exaltatum est cornu meum in deo meo, and so 
of oaul £ ort j 1> a jj t h e remnant of that psalm. And then 
Elkanah with his wife returned home to his house. 
After this our Lord visited Hannah, and she 
conceived three sons, and two daughters, which 
she brought forth. And Samuel abode in the 
house of our Lord and was minister in the sight 
of Eli. But the two sons of Eli, Hophni and 
Phineas were children of Belial, not knowing our 
Lord, but did great sins against the command- 
ments of God. And our Lord sent a prophet to 
Eli because he corrected not his sons, and said he 
would take the office from him and from his 
house, and that there should not be an old man in 
his house and kindred, but should die ere they 
came to man’s estate, and that God should raise a 
priest that should be faithful and after his heart. 

Samuel served and ministered our Lord in a 
surplice before Eli. And on a time as Eli lay in 
his bed his eyes were so dimmed that he might 
not see the lantern of God till it was quenched 
and put out. Samuel slept in the temple of our 
Lord whereas the ark of God was, and our Lord 
called Samuel, which answered : I am ready, and 
ran to Eli and said : I am ready, thou calledst me. 
Whiclrsaid: I called thee not my son, return and 
sleep, and he returned and slept. And our Lord 
called him the second time, and he arose and went 
to Eli and said : Lo ! I am here, thou calledst me, 
which answered : I called thee not, go thy way, 
and sleep. Samuel knew not the calling of our 
Lord yet, ne there was never revelation showed 
him tofore. And our Lord called Samuel the 
third time, which arose and came to Eli and said : 
I am here, for thou calledst me. Then Eli under- 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


5 


stood that our Lord had called him, and said to The 
Samuel : Go and sleep, and if thou be called Histor 
again thou shalt say 2 Speak, Lord, for thy servant ^ aul 
heareth thee. Samuel returned and slept in his 
place, and our Lord came and called him : Samuel ! 
Samuel! and Samuel said: Say, Lord, what it 
pleaseth, for thy servant heareth. And then our 
Lord said to Samuel : Lo ! I make my word to be 
known in Israel that whoso heareth, his ears shall 
ring and sound thereof. In that day I shall raise 
against Eli all that I have said upon his house. I 
shall begin and accomplish it. I have given him 
in knowledge that I shall judge his house for 
wickedness, forasmuch as he knoweth his sons 
to do wickedly, and hath not corrected them. 
Therefore 1 have sworn to the house of Eli that 
the wickedness of his house shall not be made 
clean with sacrifices ne gifts never. Samuel slept 
till on the morn, and then he rose and opened 
the doors of the house of our Lord in his surplice ; 
and Samuel was afeard to show this vision unto Eli. 

Eli called him and asked what our Lord hath said 
to him and charged him to tell him all: and 
Samuel told to him all that our Lord had said, 
and hid nothing from him. And he said : He is 
our Lord, what it pleaseth him, let him do. 

Samuel grew, and our Lord was with him in all 
his works. And it was known to all Israel frcm 
Dan to Beersheba that Samuel was the true 
prophet of our Lord. After this it was so that 
the Philistines warred against the children of 
Israel, against whom there was a battle, and the 
children of Israel overthrown and put to flight. 
Wherefore they assembled again, and took with 
them the ark of God which Hophni and Phineas, 
sons of Eli, bare, and when they came with a 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



6 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The great multitude with the ark, the Philistines were 
History afraid. Notwithstanding they fought against them 
°f Saul man iy 8 i ew thirty thousand footmen of the 
children of Israel and took the ark of God. And 
the two sons of Eli were slain, Hophni and 
Phineas. And a man of the tribe of Benjamin 
ran for to tell this unto Eli which sat abiding some 
tidings of the battle. This man, as soon as he 
entered into the town, told how the field was lost, 
the people slain, and how the ark was taken. 
And there was a great sorrow and cry. And 
when Eli heard this cry and wailing he demanded 
what this noise was and meant, and wherefore they 
so sorrowed. Then the man hied and came and 
told to Eli. Eli was at that tide ninety-eight years 
old, and his eyes were waxen blind and might 
not see, and he said : I am he that came from the 
battle, and fled this day from the host. To whom 
Eli said : What is there done my son ? He 
answered : The host of Israel is overthrown and 
fled tofore the Philistines, and a great ruin is 
made among the people, thy two sons be slain 
and the ark of God is taken. And when Eli 
heard him name the ark of God he fell down 
backward by the door and brake his neck and 
there died. He was an old man and had judged 
Israel forty years. Then the Philistines took the 
ark of God and set it in their temple of Dagon, 
by their god Dagon, in Ashdod. On the morn, 
the next day early, when they of Ashdod came 
into their temple, they saw their god Dagon 
lie on the ground tofore the ark of God upon his 
face, and the head and the two hands of Dagon 
were cut off. And there abode no more but the 
trunk only in the place. And God showed many 
vengeances to them of the country as long as the 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


7 


ark was with them, for God smote them with The 
sickness in their secret parts, and wells boiled in 
towns and fields of that region, and there grew °* ** ai 
among them so many mice, that they suffered 
great persecution and confusion in that city. The 
people seeing this vengeance and plague said : Let 
not the ark of the God of Israel abide longer with 
us, for his hand is hard on us and on Dagon our 
god, and sent for the great masters and governors 
of the Philistines, and when they were gathered 
they said : What shall we do with the ark of the 
God of Israel ? And they answered : Let it be 
led all about the cities, and so it was, and a great 
vengeance and death was had upon all the cities, 
and smote every man with plague from the most 
to the least ; in such wise that the nether parts of 
them putrified and rotted off them, and that they 
made to them seats of furs and skins to sit soft. 

Amd then they sent the ark of God into Acheron 
and when they of Acheron saw the ark, they 
cried saying : They have brought the ark of the 
God of Israel to us, for to slay us and our people. 

They cried that the ark should be sent home 
again, for much people were dead by the vengeance 
that was taken on them in their secret parts, and a 
great howling and wailing was among them. The 
ark was in the region of the Philistines seven months. 

AJter this they counselled with their priests what 
they should do with the ark, and it was concluded it 
should be sent home again, but the priests said : If 
ye send it home, send it not void, but what ye owe 
pay for your trespass and sin, and then ye shall be 
healed and cured of your sicknesses. And so they 
ordained after the number of the five provinces of 
the Philistines, five pieces of gold and five mice of 
gold, and led to a wain and put in it two wild 


Digitized by 



8 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The kine, which never bare yoke, and said, Leave their 
History ca lves at home and take the ark and set it on the 
of Saul wa j n> an d also the vessels and pieces of gold that 
ye have paid for your trespass, set them at the 
side of the ark and let them go where they will, 
and thus they sent the ark of God unto the 
children of Israel. 

Samuel then governed Israel long, and when 
he was old he set his sons judges on Israel, 
whose names were Joel and Abiah. And 
these two his sons walked not in his ways, 
but declined after covetise and took gifts and 
perverted justice and doom. Then assembled 
and gathered together all the greatest of birth of 
the children of Israel, and came to Samuel and 
said : Lo ! thou art old and thy sons walk not in 
thy ways, wherefore ordain to us a king that may 

S e and rule us like as all other nations have. 

i displeased much to Samuel when they said. 
Ordain on us a king. Then Samuel counselled on 
this matter with our Lord, to whom God said : 
Hear the voice of the people that speak to thee : 
they have not cast only thee away, but me, that I 
should not reign on them, for they do now like as 
they ever have done sith I brought them out of 
Egypt unto this day; that is that they have. served 
false gods and strange, and so do they to thee. 
Notwithstanding hear them, and tell to them 
tofore, the right of the king, and how he shall 
oppress them. 

Samuel told all this to the people that demanded 
to have a king, and said : This shall be the right 
of a king that shall reign on you. He shall take 
your sons and make them his men of war, and 
set them in his chariots and shall make them his 
carters and riders of his horse in his chariots 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


9 


and carts, and shall ordain of them tribunes and The 
centurions, earers and tillers of his fields, and **istoi 
mowers and reapers of his corn, and he shall make ot ® ai 
them smiths, and armourers of harness and cars, 
and he shall also take your daughters and make 
them his unguentaries, and ready at his will and 
pleasure ; he shall also take from you your fields 
and vineyards and the best olives and give them 
to his servants, and he shall task and dime your 
corn and sheaves, and the rents of your vineyards 
he shall value for to give to his officers and 
servants, and shall take from you your servants, 
both men and women, and set them to his 
works. And your asses and beasts he also shall 
take to his labour, your flocks of sheep he shall 
task and take the tenth or what shall please 
him, and ye shall be to him thrall and servants. 

And ye shall cry then wishing to flee from the 
face of your king, and our Lord shall not hear 
you nor deliver you because ye have asked for you 
a king. Yet for all this the people would not 
hear Samuel, but said: Give to us a king, for a 
king shall reign on us, and we shall be as all other 
people be. And our king shall judge us and go 
before us, and he shall fight our battles for us. 

And Samuel heard all and counselled with our 
Lord. To whom God commanded to ordain to 
them a king, and so he did, for he took a man of 
the tribe of Benjamin whose name was Saul, a 
good man and chosen, and there was not a better 
among all the children of Israel, and he was 
higher of stature from the shoulder upward than 
any other of all the people. And Samuel anointed 
him king upon Israel, and said to him : Our Lord 
God hath anointed thee upon his heritage and 
ordained thee a prince, and thou shalt deliver his 


Digitized by Google 



10 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The people from the hands of his enemies that be in 
History the circuit and countries about, and so departed 
of Sanl f rom him. And Samuel after this gathered the 
people together and said : Our Lord saith that he 
hath brought you from the land of Egypt, and 
saved you from the hands of all the kings that 
were your enemies and pursued you, and ye have 
forsaken our Lord God that hath only delivered 
you from all your evil and tribulations, and have 
said : Ordain upon us a king. Wherefore now 
stand every each in his. tribe, and we shall lot who 
shall be our king. And the lot fell on the tribe of 
Benjamin, and in that tribe the lot fell upon Saul 
the son of Kish. And they sought him and could 
not find him, and it was told him that he was hid 
in his house at home, and the people ran thither and 
fetched him and set him amidst all the people. And 
he was higher than any of all the people from the 
shoulder upward. Then Samuel said to the people. 
Now ye see and behold whom our Lord hath chosen, 
for there is none like him of all the people. And 
then all the people cried: Vivat Rex, live the king. 
Samuel wrote the law of the realm to the people in 
a book, and put it tofore our Lord. Thus was 
Saul made the first king in Israel, and anon had 
much war, for . on all sides men warred on the 
children of Israel, and he defended them, and Saul 
had divers battles and had victory. 

Samuel came on a time to Saul and said God 
commanded him to fight against Amalek and that 
he should slay and destroy man, woman, and child, 
ox, cow, camel and ass and sheep, and spare no- 
thing. Then Saul assembled his people and had 
two hundred thousand footmen and twenty thousand 
men of the tribe of Judah, and went forth and 
fought against Amalek and slew them, sauf he 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


ii 


saved Agag the King of Amalek alive, and all The 
other he slew, but he spared the best flocks of Histoi 
sheep and of other beasts, and also good clothes, 01 &RI 
and wethers, and all that was good he spared, 
and whatsomever was foul he destroyed. And 
this was showed to Samuel by our Lord, say- 
ing: Me forthinketh that I have ordained Saul 
king upon Israel, for he hath forsaken me, and 
not fulfilled my commandments. Samuel was 
sorry herefor, and wailed all the night. On the 
m6rn he rose and came to Saul, and Saul offered 
sacrifice to our Lord of the pillage that he had 
taken. And Samuel demanded of Saul what 
noise that was he heard of sheep and beasts, and 
he said that they were of the beasts that the 
people had brought from Amalek to offer unto our 
Lord, and the residue were slain. They have 
spared the best and fattest for to do sacrifice with 
unto thy Lord God. Then said Samuel to Saul : 
Rememberest thou not that whereas thou wert 
least among the tribes of Israel thou wert made 
upperest? And our Lord anointed thee, and 
made thee king. And he said to thee: Go 
and slay the sinners of Amalek and leave none 
alive, man ne beast; why hast thou not obeyed 
the commandment of our Lord ? And hast run 
to robbery and done evil in the sight of God? 

And then said Saul to Samuel: I have taken 
Agag, king of the Amalekites, and brought him 
with me, but I have slain Amalek. The people 
have taken of the sheep and beasts of the best for 
to offer unto our Lord God. And then said 
Samuel : Trowest thou that our Lord would 
rather have sacrifice and offerings than not to 
obey his commandments? Better is obedience 
than sacrifice, and better it is to take heed to do 


Digitized by Google 



12 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


# The after thy Lord than to offer the fat kidneys of the 
H «* 0, T wethers. For it is a sin to withstand and to 
o ^aut re p U g n against his Lord like the sin of idolatry. 
And because thou hast not obeyed onr Lord, and 
cast away his word, our Lord hath cast thee away 
that thou shalt not be king. Then said Saul to 
Samuel : I have sinned for I have not obeyed the 
word of God and thy words, but have dreaded the 
people and obeyed to their request, but I pray thee 
to bear my sin and trespass and return with me 
that I may worship our Lord. And Samuel 
answered, I shall not return with thee. And so 
Samuel departed, and yet ere he departed, he did 
do slay Agag the king. And Samuel saw never 
Saul after unto his death. 

Then our Lord bade Samuel to go and anoint 
one of the sons of Isai, otherwise called Jesse, to be 
king of Israel. And so he came into Bethlehem 
unto Jesse and bade him bring his sons tofore him. 
This Jesse had eight sons, he brought tofore 
Samuel seven of them, and Samuel said there was 
not he that he would have. Then he said that 
there was no more, save one which was youngest 
and yet a child, and kept sheep in the field. And 
Samuel said : Send for him, for I shall eat no 
bread till he come. And so he was sent for and 
brought. He was ruddy and fair of visage and 
well favoured, and Samuel arose, and took an horn 
with oil and anointed him in the middle of his 
brethren. And forthwith the spirit of our Lord 
came directly in him that same day and ever after. 
Then Samuel departed and came in to Ramah. 
And the spirit of our Lord went away from Saul 
and an evil spirit oft vexed him. Then his 
servants said to him: Thou oft art vexed with 
an evil spirit, it were good to have one that could 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*3 


harp, to be with thee when the spirit vexeth thee, The 
thou shalt bear it the lighter And he 'said to his History 
servants : Provide ye to me such one. And then ^ au * 
one said : I saw one of Jesse's sons play on a harp, 
a fair child and strong, wise in his talking and our 
Lord is with him. Then Saul sent messages to 
Jesse for David, and Jesse sent David his son 
with a present of bread, wine, and a kid, to Saul. 

And always when the evil spirit vexed Saul, 

David harped tofore him and anon he was eased, 
and the evil spirit went his way. 

After this the Philistines gathered them into 
great hosts to make war against Saul and the 
children of Israel, and Saul gathered the children 
of Israel together and came against them in the 
vale of Terebinthe. The Philistines stood upon 
the hill on that other part, and the valley was 
between them. And there came out of the host 
of the Philistines a great giant named Goliath of 
Gath ; he was six cubits high and a palm, and a * 
helmet of brass on his head, and was clad in a 
habergeon. The weight of his habergeon was of 
five thousand shekels of weight of metal. He had 
boots of brass on his calves, and his shoulders were ✓ 
covered with plates of brass. His glaive was as 
a great colestaff, and there was thereon six shekels 
of iron, and his squire went tofore him and cried 
against them of Israel, and said they should choose 
a man to fight a singular battle against Goliath, and 
if he were overcome the Philistines should be 
servants to Israel, and if he prevailed and over- 
came his enemy, they of Israel should serve the 
Philistines, and thus he did cry forty days long. 

Saul and the children of Israel were sore afraid. 

David was at this time in Bethlehem with his 
father, and kept sheep, and three of his brethren 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



14 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The were in the host with Saul. To whom Jesse 
History said : David, take this pottage, ten loaves of bread, 
of Saul ten cheeses, and go run unto the host to thy 
brethren, and see how they do, and learn how 
they be arrayed. David delivered his sheep to 
one to keep them, and bare these things unto the 
host. And when he came thither he heard a 
great cry, and he demanded after his brethren. 
And that same time came forth that giant Goliath 
and said, as he had done tofore, and David heard 
him speak. All they of Israel fled for fear of 
him, and David demanded what he was, and it 
was told him that he was come to destroy Israel, 
and also that what man that might slay him, the 
king should enrich him with great riches, and 
should give to him his daughter, and shall make 
the house of his father without tribute. And 
David said : What is this uncircumcised that hath 
despised the host of the God of Israel ? And 
what reward shall he have that shall slay him ? 
And the people said as afore is said. And when 
his oldest brother heard him speak to the people 
he was wroth with him, and said : Wherefore art 
thou come hither and hast left the few sheep in 
desert. I know well thy pride, thou art come for 
to see the battle. And David said : What have 
I done? 1 8 it not as the people said? I dare 
fight well with this giant ; and declined from his 
brother to other of the people. And all this was 
showed to Saul, and David was brought to him, and 
said to Saul : I, thy servant, shall fight against this 
giant if thou wilt. And Saul said to him : Thou 
mayst not withstand this Philistine nor fight against 
him, for thou art but a child ; this giant hath been 
a fighter from his childhood. David said to Saul : 
I thy servant kept my father’s sheep, and there 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


15 


came a lion and a bear and took away a wether The 
from the middle of my flock, and I pursued after, 
and took it again from their mouths, and they arose °‘ 
and would have devoured me, and I caught them 
by the jaws and slew them. I thy servant slew 
the lion and the bear, therefore this Philistine un- 
circumcised shall be as one of them. I shall now 
go and deliver Israel from this opprobrium and 
shame. How is this Philistine uncircumcised so 
hardy as to curse the host of the living God? 

And yet said David: The Lord that kept me 
from the might of the lion and from the strength 
of the bear, he will deliver me from the power of 
this Philistine. Saul said then to David: Go, 
and our Lord be with thee. Saul did do arm him 
with his armour, and girded his sword about him. 

And when he was armed, David said : I may not^ 
ne cannot fight thus, for I am not accustomed ne 
used, and unarmed him, and took his staff that he 
had in his hand, and chose to him five good round S 
stones from the brook and put them in his bag, 
and took a sling in his hand, and went forth against 
the giant. And when Goliath saw him come, he 
despised him and said : Weenest thou that I am a 
hound that comest with thy staff to me ? And he 
cursed David by his gods, and said to David : 
Come hither and I shall give thy flesh to the fowls 
of heaven and to the beasts of the earth. David 
said unto Goliath : Thou comest to me with thy 
sword and glaive, and I come to thee in the name 
of the Lord God of the host of Israel which thou 
hast this day despised ; and that Lord shall give 
thee in my hand, and I shall slay thee and smite 
off thy head. And I shall give this day the bodies 
of the men of war of the Philistines to the fowls 
of heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. Then 

B 


VOL. 11. 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



1 6 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Goliath rose and hied towards David, and David 
History on that other side hied, and took a stone and laid 
of Saul j t j n gling, and threw it at the giant, and smote 
him in the forehead in such wise that the stone 
was fixed there, in that he fell down on his visage. 
Thus prevailed David against the Philistine with 
his sling and stone, and smote him and slew him. 
And he had no sword but he went and took 
Goliath’s own sword and therewith smote off his 
head. And then the Philistines seeing this giant 
thus slain, fled, and the Israelites after followed, 
and slew many of them, and returned again and 
came into the tents, pavilions and lodgings of the 
Philistines, and took all the pillage. 

David took the head of Goliath and brought it 
into Jerusalem, and his arms he brought into his 
tabernacle. And Abner brought David, having 
the head of Goliath in his hand, lofore Saul. 
And Saul demanded of him of what kindred that he 
was, and he said that he was son of Jesse of Bethle- 
hem, and forthwith that same time Jonathan, the son 
of Saul, loved David as his own soul. Saul then 
would not give him licence to return to his father, 
and Jonathan and he were confederate and swore 
each of them to be true to other, for Jonathan gave 
his coat that he was clad withal, and all his other 
garments, unto his sword and spear, unto David. 
And David did all that ever Saul bade him do 
wisely and prudently. And when he returned 
from the battle, and Goliath was slain, the women 
came out from every town singing with choirs and 
timpanes against the coming of Saul with great joy 
and gladness, saying : Saul hath slain a thousand 
and David hath slain ten thousand. And this 
saying displeased much to Saul, which said : They 
have given to David ten thousand and to me one 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


17 


thousand 5 what may he more have save the realm, The 
and to be king? For this cause Saul never loved History 
David after that day, ne never looked on him 
friendly but ever sought means afterward to destroy 
David, for he dreaded that David should be lord 
with him, and put him from him. And David 
was wise and kept him well from him. And after 
this he wedded Michal, daughter of Saul, and 
Jonathan made oft times peace between Saul and 
David, yet Saul kept no promise, but ever lay 
in wait to slay David. And Jonathan warned 
David thereof. And David gat him a company 
of men of war to the number of four hundred, and 
kept him in the mountains. 

And on a time David was at home with his 
wife Michal, and Saul sent thither men of war to 
slay him in his house in the morning ; and when 
Michal heard thereof, she said to David : But if 
thou save thyself this night, to-morn thou shalt die, 
and she let him out by a window by which he 
escaped and saved himself. Michal took an image 
and laid in his bed, and a rough skin of a goat on 
the head of the image, and covered it with clothes. 

And on the mom Saul sent spies for David, and it 
was answered to them that he lay sick in his bed. 

Then after this sent Saul messengers for to see 
David, and said to them : Bring him to me in his 
bed that he may be slain. And when the messengers 
came they found a simulachre or an image in his 
bed, and goats’ skins on the head. Then said 
Saul to Michal his daughter : Why hast thou 
mocked me so, and hast suffered mine enemy to 
flee? And Michal answered to Saul and said: 

He said to me : Let me go or I shall slay thee. 

David went to Samuel in Rama and told him all 
that Saul had done to him. And it was told to 


Digitized by Google 



i8 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Saul that David was with Samuel, and he sent 
History thither messengers to take him. And when they 
of haul came th e y found them with the company of 
prophets, and they sat and prophesied with them. 
And he sent more. And they did also so. And 
the third time he sent more messengers. And they 
also prophesied. And then Saul being wroth asked 
where Samuel and David were, and went to them, 
and he prophesied when he came also, and took off 
his clothes and was naked all that day and night before 
Samuel. David then fled from thence and came to 
Jonathan and complained to him saying : What have 
I offended that thy father seeketh to slay me ? Jona- 
than was sorry therefore, for he loved well David. 
After this Saul ever sought for to slay David. And 
on a time Saul went into a cave for to ease him, 
and David was within the cave, to whom his squire 
said : Now hath God brought thine enemy into 
thine hand ; now go and slay him. And David 
said : God forbid that I should lay any hand on him, 
he is anointed. I shall never hurt ne grieve him, 
let God do his pleasure. And he went to Saul 
and cut off a gobet of his mantle and kept it. And 
when Saul was gone out, soon after issued David 
out and cried to Saul saying : Lo ! Saul, God hath 
brought thee into my hands. I might have slain 
thee if I had would, but God forbade that I should 
lay hand on thee, my lord anointed of God. And 
what have I offended that thou seekest to slay me ? 
Who art thou ? said Saul. Art thou not David 
my son ? Yes, said David, I am thy servant, and 
kneeled down and worshipped him. Then said 
Saul : I have sinned, and wept and also said : 
Thou art rightfuller than I am, thou hast done to 
me good, and I have done to thee evil. And thou 
hast well showed to me this day that God had 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


19 


brought me into thine hand, and thou hast not slain The 
me. God reward thee for this, that thou hast done History 
to me now know I well that thou shah reign in 
Israel. I pray thee to be friendly to my seed, and 
destroy not my house, and swear and promise me 
that thou take not away my name from the house 
of my father ; and David sware and promised to 
Saul. And then Saul departed and went home, 
and David and his. people went in to surer places. 

Anon after this Samuel died, and was buried in his 
house in Rama. And all Israel bewailed him 
greatly. Then there was a rich man in the mount 
of Carmel that hight Nabal, and on a time he 
sheared and clipped his sheep, to whom David 
sent certain men, and bade them say that David 
greeted him well, and whereas aforetimes his 
shepherds kept his sheep in desert, he never was 
grievous to them, ne they lost not so much as a 
sheep as long as they were with us, and that he 
might ask his servants for they could tell, and that 
he would now in their need send them what it 
pleased him. Nabal answered to the children of 
David: Who is that David? Trow ye that I 
shall send the meat that I have made ready for 
them that shear my sheep and send it to men that 
I know not ? The men returned and told to 
David all that he had said. Then said David to 
his men : Let every man take his sword and gird 
him withal, and David took his sword and girt 
him. And David went and four hundred men 
followed him, and he left two hundred behind him. 

One of the servants of Nabal told to Abigail* 

Nabal’s wife, how that David had sent messengers 
from the desert unto his lord, and how wroth and 
wayward he was, and also he said that those men 
were good enough to them when they were in 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



20 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The desert, ne never perished beast of ours as long as 
History they were there. They were a wall and a shield 
of Saul £ 0J . U8 both day and night all the time that we kept 
our flocks there, wherefore consider what is to be 
done. They purpose to do harm to him and to his 
house, for he is the son of Belial in such wise that 
no man may speak with him. Then Abigail hied 
her and took two hundred loaves of bread, one 
hundred bottles of wine, five wethers sodden, and 
five measures of pottage, and one hundred bonds of 
grapes dried, and two hundred masses of caricares, 
and laid all this upon asses, and said to her servants : 
Go ye tofore, and I shall follow after. She told 
hereof nothing to her husband Nabal. Then she 
took an ass and rode after, and when she came to 
the foot of the hdl, David and his men descended ; 
to whom she ran, and David said : I have for 
naught saved all the beasts of this Nabal in desert, 
and there perished nothing of his that pertained to 
him, and he hath yielded evil for good. By the 
living God I shall not leave as much of his alive as 
shall piss against a wall. As soon as Abigail saw 
David she descended from her ass, and fell down 
tofore David, upon her visage and worshipped him 
on the earth, and fell down to his feet and said : 
In me, said she, my lord, be this wickedness, I 
beseech thee that I thine handmaiden may speak 
to thine ears, and that thou wilt hear the words of 
me thy servant. I pray and require thee my lord, 
let not thy heart be set against this wicked man 
Nabal, for according to his name he is a fool, and 
folly is with him. I thine handmaid saw not thy 
children that thou sendedst. Now therefore, my 
lord, for the love of God and of thy soul, suffer not 
thy hand to shed no blood, and I beseech God 
that thine enemies may be like Nabal and they that 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


21 


would thee harm ; and I beseech thee to receive The 
this blessing and present which I thine handmaid Histoi 
have brought to thee, my lord, and give it to thy °* Sai 
men that follow thee, my lord. Take away the 
wickedness from me thy servant, and I beseech 
God to make to thee, my lord, a house of truth, for 
thou, my lord, shalt fight the battles of our Lord 
God ; and let no malice be found in thee, never in 
all the dap of thy life. If ever any man arise 
against thee or. would pursue or would hurt thee, I 
beseech God to keep thee. And when our Lord 
God hath accomplished to thee, my lord, all that he 
hath spoken good of thee, and hath constituted thee 
duke upon Israel, let this not be in thy thought, ne 
scruple in thy heart that thou shouldest shed blood 
not guilty, ne be thou not now avenged. And 
when our Lord God hath done well to thee, my 
lord, have thou remembrance on me thine hand- 
maid, and do well to me. And David said to 
Abigail : Blessed be God of Israel that sent thee 
this day to meet me, and blessed be thy speech, and 
blessed be thou that hast withdrawn me from 
bloodshedding, and that I avenged me not on mine 
enemy with mine hand, else by the living God of 
Israel, if thou hadst not come unto me, there 
should not have blyven unto Nabal to-morn in the 
morning one pissing against a wall. Then David 
received all that she brought and said to her : Go 
peaceably into thine house, lo ! I have heard thy voice 
and I have honoured thy visage ; and so Abigail came 
unto Nabal, and David returned into the place he 
came from. Nabal made a great feast in his house, 
like the feast of a king, and the heart of Nabal was 
jocund ; he was drunken, and Abigail his wife told 
to him no word till on the morn, little ne much. 

On the morn when Nabal had digested the wine, 


Digitized by Google 



22 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


# The his wife told him all these words. And his heart 
was mortified within him, and he was dead like a 
° ® aul stone, for the tenth day after, our Lord smote him 
and he died. And when David heard that he was 
dead, he said : Blessed be the good Lord that 
hath judged the cause of mine opprobrium from 
the hand of Nabal, and hath kept me his servant 
from harm, and our Lord hath yielded the malice 
of Nabal on his own head. Then David sent to 
Abigail for to have her to his wife, and she humbled 
herself and said she his handmaid was ready to 
wash the feet of his servants. And she arose and 
took with her five maidens which Went afoot by 
her, and she rode upon an ass, and followed the 
messengers, and was made wife . to David. And 
David also took another wife called Ahinoam of 
Jezreel, and both two were his wives. 

After this Saul alway sought David for to slay 
him. And the people called Zjjmhites told to Saul 
that David was hid in the hill of Hachilah which was 
on the after part of the wilderness, and Saul took 
with him three thousand chosen men and followed 
and sought David. David when he heard of the 
coming of Saul went into the place whereas Saul 
was, and when he was asleep he took one with him 
and went into the tent where Saul slept, and Abner 
with him and all his people. Then said Abishai 
to David : God hath put thine enemy this day in 
thine hands, now I shall go and smite him through 
with my spear, and then after that we shall have 
no need to dread him. And David said to 
Abishai: Slay him not; who may extend his 
/ hand into the anointed king of God and be inno- 
cent ? And David said yet more : By the living 
God, but if God smite him or the days come that 
he shall die or perish in battle, God be merciful to 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEH LEGEND 


23 


me, as I shall not lay my hand on him that is The 
anointed of our Lord. Now take the spear that Histoi 
standeth at his head, and the cup of water, and let °* 
us go. David took the spear and the cup and 
departed thence and there was not one that saw 
them ne awaked, for they slept all. Then when 
David was on the hill far from them, David cried 
to the people and to Abner, saying : Abner, shalt 
not thou answer ? And Abner answered : Who art 
thou that cryest and wakest the king ? And David 
said to Abner : Art thou not a man and there is 
none like thee in Israel ? why hast thou not there- 
fore kept thy lord the king ? There is one of the 
people gone in to slay the king thy lord ; by the 
living Lord it is not good that ye do, but be ye 
worthy to die because ye have not kept your lord 
anointed of our Lord. Now look and see where 
the king’s spear is, and the cup of water that stood 
at his head. Saul knew the voice of David and 
said : Is not this thy voice, my son David ? And 
David said: It is my voice, my lord king. For 
what cause dost thou, my lord, pursue me thy 
servant? what thing have I done and what evil 
have I committed with my hand? Thou seest 
well I might have slain thee if I would; God 
judge between thee and me* And Saul said : I 
have sinned, return, my son ; I shall never here- 
after do thee harm ne evil, for thy soul is precious 
in my sight this day. It appeareth now that I 
have done follily, and am ignorant in many things. 

Then said David : Lo ! here is the spear of the 
king, let a child come fetch it, our Lord shall 
reward to every man after his justice and faith. 

Our Lord hath this day brought thee into my 
hands, and yet I would not lay mine hand on him 
that is anointed of our Lord. And like as thy 


Digitized by Google 



24 


THE GOLPEN LEGEND 


The soul Is magnified this day in my sight, so be ;ny 
80U ^ the sight of God and deliver me 

o Saul £. om ^ an guj 8 h # Saul said then to David: Blessed 
be thou, my son David. And David went then 
his way, and Saul returned home again. 

And David said in his heart: Sometime it might 
hap to me to fall and come into the hands of Saul, 
it is better I flee from him and save me in the land 
of the Philistines. And he went thence with six 
hundred men and came to Achish king of Gath and 
dwelled there. And when Saul understood that 
he was with Achish he ceased to seek him. And 
Achish delivered to David a town to dwell in 
named Ziklag. 

After this the Philistines gathered and assembled 
much people against Israel. And Saul assembled 
all Israel and came unto Gilboa ; and when Saul 
saw all the host of the Philistines, his heart dreaded 
and fainted sore, he cried for to have counsel of 
our Lord. And our Lord answered him not, ne 
byswevens ne by priests, ne by prophets. Then 
said Saul to his servants: Fetch to me a woman 
having a phiton, otherwise called a phitoness or a 
witch. And they said that there was such a 
woman in Endor. Saul then changed his habit 
and clothing, and did on other clothing, and went, 
and two men with him, and came to the woman 
by night, and made her by her craft to raise 
Samuel. And Samuel said to Saul j Why hast 
thou put me from my rest, for to arise ? And Saul 
said : I am coarted thereto, for the Philistines 
fight against me, and God is gone from me, and 
will not hear me, neither by prophets, ne hy 
swevens. And Samuel said: What askest thou 
of me when God is gone from thee and gone unto 
David ? God shall do to thee as he hath said to 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN. LEGEND 25 

thee by me,- and shall cut thy realm from thine The 
hand, and shall give it to thy neighbour David, 

For thou hast not obeyed his voice, ne hast not 0 
done his commandment in Amalek ; therefore thou 
shalt lose the battle and Israel shall be overthrown. 
To-morrow thou and thy children shall be with 
me, and our Lord shall suffer the children of 
Israel to fall in the hands of the Philistines. Anon 
then Saul fell down to the earth. The words of 
Samuel made him afeard and there was no strength 
in him, for he had eaten no bread of all that day, 
he was greatly troubled. Then the phitoness 
desired him to eat, and she slew a paschal lamb that 
she had, and dighted and set it tofore him, and 
bread. And when he had eaten he walked with 
his servants all that night. And on the morn the 
Philistines assailed Saul and them of Israel, and 
fought a great battle, and the men of Israel fled 
from the face of the Philistines, and many of them 
were slain in the mount of Gilboa. The Philistines 
smote in against Saul and his sons, and slew 
Jonathan and Abinadab, and Melchi-shua, sons 
of Saul. And all the burden of the battle was 
turned on Saul, and the archers followed him and 
wounded him sore. Then said Saul to his squire : 
Pluck out thy sword and slay me, that these men 
uncircumcised come not and, scorning, slay me; 
and his squire would not for he was greatly afeard. 

Then Saul took his sword and slew himself, which 
thing when his squire saw, that is that Saul was 
dead, he took his sword and fell on it and was 
dead with him. Thus was Saul dead, and his 
three sons and his squire, and all his men that 
day together. Then the children of Israel that 
were thereabouts, and on that other side of Jordan, 
seeing that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



26 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The and his three sons were dead, left their cities and 
?D*v 3 fled. The Philistines came and dwelled there ; and 
0 A d the next day the Philistines went for to rifle and 
pillage them that were dead, and they found Saul 
and his three sons lying in the hill of Gilboa. 
And they cut off the head of Saul, and robbed 
him of his armour, and sent it into the land of the 
Philistines all about, that it might be showed in the 
temple of their idols, and unto the people ; and 
set up his arms in the temple of Ashtaroth, and 
hung his body on the wall of Bethshan. And 
when the men that dwelt in Jabesh-Gilead saw 
what the Philistines had done unto Saul, all the 
strongest men of them arose and went all that 
night and took down the bodies of Saul and of his 
sons from the wall of Bethshan and burnt them, 
and took the bones and buried them in the wood 
of Jabesh-Gilead and fasted seven days. 

Thus endeth the life of Saul which was first king 
upon Israel 9 and for disobedience of God*s command- 
ment was slain 9 and his heirs never reigned long 
after. 


The History of David. 

Here followeth how David reigned after Saul 9 and 
governed Israel. Shortly taken out of the 
Bible , the most historial matters and but little 
touched. 

After the death of Saul David returned from 
the journey that he had against Amalek. For 
whilst David had been out with Achish the king, 
they of Amalek had been in Ziklag and taken all 
that was therein prisoners, and robbed and carried 
away with them the two wives of David, and had 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


2 7 


set fire and burnt the town. And when David came The 
again home and saw the town burnt he pursued History 
after, and by the conveying of one of them of Davu * 
Amalek that was left by the way sick, for to have 
his life he brought, David upon the host of Amalek 
whereas they sat and ate and drank. And David 
smote on them with his meiny and slew down all 
that he found, and rescued his wives and all the 
good that they had taken, and took much more of 
them. And when he was come to Ziklag, the 
third day after there came one from the host or 
Saul, and told to David how that Israel had lost 
the battle, and how they were fled, and how Saul 
the king and Jonathan his son were slain. David 
said to the young man that brought these tidings : 

How knowest thou that Suul and Jonathan be 
dead ? And he answered it was so by adventure 
that I came upon the mount of Gilboa, and Saul 
rested upon his spear, and the horsemen and the 
chariots of the Philistines approached to himward, 
and he looked behind him and saw me, and called 
me, and said to me ; Who art thou ? And I said 
I am an Amalekite, and then he said : Stand upon 
me and slay me, for I am full of anguish, and yet 
my soul is in me. And I then standing on him 
slew him, knowing well that he might not live 
after the ruin. And I took the diadem from his 
head, and the armyile from his arm, which I have 
brought hither to thee, my lord. David took and 
rent his vestment, and all the men that were him, 
and wailed and sorrowed much the death of Saul 
and Jonathan and of all the men of Israel, and 
fasted that day till even. And David said to the 
young man : Of whence art thou ? And he said : 

I am the son of an Amalekite. And David said to 
him : Why dreadedst thou not to put thy hand forth 


Digitized by VjOOQIC 



28 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The to slay him that is anointed of God ? David 
of David ca ^ ec ^ one bis men > an< i bade him slay him. 
And he smote him and slew him. And David 
said : Thy blood be on thy head ! thine own 
mouth hath spoken against thee, saying: I have 
slain Saul which was king anointed of our Lord. 

David sorrowed and bewailed much the death 
of Saul and of Jonathan. After this David 
counselled with our Lord and demanded if he 
should go in to one of the cities of Judah. And 
tror Lord bade him go, and he asked whither, and 
our Lord said Into Hebron. Then David took 
his two wives and all the men that were with him, 
every each with his household, and dwelled in the 
towns of Hebron. And thither came the men of 
Judah and anointed David king to reign upon the 
tribe of Judah. And Abner prince of the host of 
Saul, and other servants of Saul, took Ishbosheth 
the son of Saul, and led him about, and made him 
king over Israel, except the tribe of Judah. 
Ishbosheth was forty years when he began to 
reign, and he reigned two years. The house of 
Judah only followed David. After this it happed 
that Abner, prince of the host of Ishbosheth, with 
certain men, went out of the castles, and Joab with 
certain men of David went also out and ran by the 
piscine of Gibeon. One party was on that one 
side, and that other on the other. And Abner 
said to Joab: Let our young men play and 
skirmish together, and Joab agreed. And there 
rose twelve of Benjamin, of the party of Ish- 
bosheth, and twelve of the children of David ; and 
when they met together each took other by the 
head, and roof their swords into each other’s sides 
and were all there slain. And there arose a great 
battle, and Abner and his fellowship were put to 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


29 


flight by the men of David. And among all other The 
there was Asahel one of the brethren of Joab and History 
was the swiftest runner that might be, and pursued David 
Abner, and Abner looked behind him, and bade 
him decline on the right side or on the left side, 
and take one of the young men and his harness, 
and come not at me. Asahel would not leave him ; 
yet Abner said to him: Go from me and follow 
not me lest I be compelled to slay thee, and then 
I may not make my peace with Joab thy brother. 

Which would not hear Abner, but despised him, 
and Abner then turned and slew him in the same 
place, and anon the sun went down and they 
withdrew. There were slain of the children of 
David nineteen men and of them of Benjamin 
three hundred and sixty were slain, and thus there 
was long strife and contention between the house 
of David and the bouse of Ishbosheth. After this 
Abner took a concubine of Saul and held her, 
wherefore Ishbosheth reproved him of it and Abner 
was wroth greatly thereof; and came to David 
and made friendship with him. Joab was not 
there when Aimer made his peace with David ; 
but when he knew it he came to Abner with a 
fair semblant and spake fair to him by dissimulation, 
and slew him for to avenge the death of Asahel 
his brother. And when David heard how Joab 
had slain Abner he cursed him, and bewailed 
greatly the * death of Abner, and did do bury him 
honorably and David followed the bier himself. 

And when Ishbosheth, the son of Saul, heard 
that Abner was dead, he was all abashed and 
all Israel sore troubled. There were two princes 
of thieves with Ishbosheth named Baanah and 
Rechab, which came on a day in to Ishbosheth 
where he lay and slept, and there they slew 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



30 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The him, and took privily his head and brought it 
History j n to David in Hebron and said : Lo, here is the 
of David jj ea( j 0 f thine enemy Ishbosheth, that sought to 
slay thee ; this day God hath given to thee my lord 
vengeance of Saul and of his seed. David answered 
to them : By the living God that hath delivered 
me from all anguish, him that told me that he had 
slain Saul, and had thought to have > had a reward 
of me, I did do slay, how much more ye that be 
so wicked to slay him that is not guilty* in his 
house and upon his bed? Shall I not ask his 
blood of your hands, and throw you out of this 
world ? Yes, certainly. And David commanded 
to his servants to slay them, and so they were slain, 
and cut off their hands and feet, and hung them on 
the piscine in Hebron, and took the head of 
Ishbosheth and buried it in the sepulchre of 
Abner. And then came all the tribes of Israel 
to David in Hebron, saying : We be thy mouth 
and thy flesh, when Saul lived and was king on us 
and reigned, thou wert coming and going; and 
because God hath said thou shalt reign upon my 
people and be their governor, therefore we shall 
obey thee. And all the seniors of Israel came and 
did homage to David in Hebron, and anointed him 
king over them. 

David was thirty years old when he began to 
reign and he reigned forty years. He reigned in 
Hebron upon Judah seven years and six months, 
and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years upon 
all Israel and Judah. David then made him a 
dwelling-place in the hill of Sion in Jerusalem. 
And after this the Philistines made war against 
him but he oft overthrew them, and slew many of 
them, and made them tributary to him, and after 
brought the ark of God in Jerusalem, and set it in 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


3i 


his house. After this yet the Philistines made war The 
again unto him and other kings were aiding and History 
helping them against David, whom David overcame 0 avl 
and slew and put under. 

And on a time when Joab was out with his men 
of war lying at a siege tofore a city, David was at 
home, and walked in his chamber, and as he 
looked out at a window he saw a fair woman wash 
her and bain her in her chamber, which stood 
against his house, and demanded of his servants 
who she was, and they said she was Uriah’s wife. 

He sent for her and lay by her and gat her with 
child. And when David understood that she was 
with child, he sent letters to Joab and bade him to 
send home to him Uriah ; and Joab sent Uriah to 
David, and David demanded how the host was 
ruled, and after bade him go home to his house 
and wash his feet. And Uriah went thence, and 
the king sent to him his dish with meat. Uriah 
would not go home, but lay before the gate of the 
king’ 8 house with other servants of the king’s. 

And it was told to the king that Uriah went not 
home, and then David said to Uriah : Thou 
comest from a far way, why goest thou not home? 

And Uriah said to David: The ark of God and 
Israel and Judah be in the pavilions, and my lord 
Joab and the servants of thee, my lord, lie on the 
ground, and would ye that I should go to my house 
and eat and drink, and sleep with my wife ? By 
thy health and by the health of my soul I shall 
not do so. Then David said to Uriah, Abide here 
then this night, and to-morrow I shall deliver thee. 

Uriah abode there that day and the next, and 
David made him eat tofore him and made him 
drunk, yet for all that he would not go home, but 
lay with the servants of David. Then on the morn 
VOL. 11. c 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



32 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The David wrote a letter to Joab, that he should set 
History Uriah in the weakest place of the battle and where 
©f David mo8 t jeopardy was, and that he should be left 
there that he might be slain. And Uriah bare 
this letter to Joab, and it was so done as David 
had written, and Uriah was slain in the battle. 
And Joab sent word to David how they had 
fought, and how Uriah was slain and dead. When 
Uriah’s wife heard that her husband was dead, 
she mourned and wailed him ; and after the 
mourning David sent for her and wedded her, 
and she bare him a son. And this that David 
had committed on Uriah displeased greatly our 
Lord. 

Then our Lord sent Nathan the prophet unto 
David, which, when he came, said to him : There 
were two men dwelling in a city, that one rich and 
that other poor. The rich man had sheep and 
oxen right many, but the poor man had but one 
little sheep, which he bought and nourished and 
grew with his children, eating of his bread and 
drinking of his cup, and slept in his bosom. She 
was to him as a daughter. And on a time when a 
certain pilgrim came to the rich man, he, sparing 
his own sheep and oxen to make a feast to the 
pilgrim that was come to him, took the only 
sheep of the poor man and made meat thereof to 
his guest. David was wroth and said to Nathan : 
By the living God, the man that hath so done is 
the child of death, the man that hath so done shall 
yield therefor four times double. Then said 
Nathan to David : Thou art the same man that 
hath done this thing. This said the Lord God 
of Israel : I have anointed thee king upon Israel, 
and I have kept thee from the hand of Saul, and I 
have given to thee an house to keep in thine house- 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


33 


hold and wives in thy bosom. I have given to The 
thee the house of Israel and the house of Judah, Hist of v 
and if these be small things I shall add and give to 0 Davld 
thee much more and greater. Why hast thou 
therefore despised the word of God and hast done 
evil in the sight of our Lord ? Thou hast slain 
Uriah with a sword, and his wife hast thou taken 
unto thy wife, and thou hast slain him with the 
sword of the sons of Ammon. Therefore the 
sword shall not go from thy house, world without 
end, forasmuch as thou hast despised me and 
hast taken Uriah's wife unto thy wife. This said 
our Lord : I shall raise evil against thee, and shall 
take thy wives in thy sight and give them to thy 
neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives tofore 
thine eyes. Thou hast done it privily, but I 
shall make this to be done and open in the sight of 
all Israel. And then said David to Nathan: 

Peccavi ! I have sinned against our Lord. 

Nathan said : Our Lord hath taken away thy sin, 
thou shalt not die, but for as much as thou hast 
made the enemy to blaspheme the name of God, 
therefore the son that is born to thee shall die by 
death. And Nathan returned to his house. And 
for this sin David made this psalm : Miserere mei 
deus, which is a psalm of mercy, for David did 
great penance for these sins of adultery and also of 
homicide. 

For as I once was beyond the sea riding in the 
company of a noble knight named Sir John Capons, 
and was also doctor in both laws, and was born in 
Malyorke, and had been viceroy and governor of 
Arragon and Catalonia, and that time counsellor 
unto the Duke of Burgundy, Charles, it happed 
we communed of the history of David; and this 
said nobleman told me that he had read that David 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



34 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The did this penance following for these said sins. 
History That he dolved him in the ground standing naked 
of David unt0 t h e headj 80 long that the worms began to 
creep in his flesh, and made a verse of this psalm 
Miserere, and then came out, and when he was 
whole thereof he went in again and stood so again 
as long as afore is said and made the second verse, 
and so as many times he was dolven in the earth as 
be verses in the said psalm of Miserere mei deus, 
and every time was abiding therein till he felt the 
worms creep in his flesh. This was a great pen- 
ance and a token of a great repentance, for there 
be in the psalm twenty-one verses, and twenty-one 
times he was dolven. Thus this nobleman told 
me, riding between the town of Ghent in Flanders 
and the town of Brussels in Brabant. 

Therefore God took away this sin, and forgave 
it him, but the son that she brought forth died. 
And after this Bathsheba, that had been Uriah's 
wife, conceived and brought forth another son 
named Solomon, which was well-beloved of God, 
and after David, Solomon was king. 

After this David had much war and trouble 
and anger, in so much that on a time Amnon, 
oldest son of David, loved Thamar his sister. 
This Thamar was Absalom's sister by the mother's 
side, and Amnon forced and lay by her, and 
when he had done his pleasure, he hated her, and 
threw her out of his chamber, and she complained 
unto Absalom. David knew hereof, and was 
right sorry for it, but he would not rebuke his son 
Amnon for it, for he loved him because he was 
his first begotten son. Absalom hated Aonnon 
ever after, and when Absalom on a time did do 
shear his sheep he prayed all his brethren to come 
eat with him, and made them a feast like a 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


35 


king’ 8 feast. At which feast he did do slay his The 
brother Amnon ; and anon it was told to the History 
King David that Absalom had slain all the king’s °* 
sons. Wherefore the king was in great heaviness 
and sorrow, but anon after it was told him that 
there was no more slain but Amnon, and the 
other sons came home. And Absalom fled into 
Geshur, and was there three years, and durst not 
come home. And after by the moyen of Joab 
he was sent for, and came into Jerusalem, but yet 
he might not come in his father the king’s 
presence, and dwelled there two years, and might 
not see the King his father. * This Absalom was 
the fairest man that ever was, for from the sole of 
his foot unto his head there was not a spot ; he 
had so much hair on his head that it grieved him 
to bear, wherefore it was shorn off once a year, it 
weighed two hundred shekels of good weight. 

Then when he abode so long that he might not 
come to his father’s presence he sent for Joab to 
come speak with him, and he would not come. 

He sent again for him and he came not. Then 
Absalom said to his servants : Know ye Joab’s 
field that lieth by my field? They said yea. Go 
ye, said he, and set fire in the barley that is 
therein, and burn it. And Joab’s servants came 
and told to Joab that Absalom had set fire 
on his corn. Then Joab came to Absalom and 
said : Why hast thou set fire on my corn ! And 
he said, I have sent twice to thee, praying thee to 
come to me that I might send thee to the king, 
and that thou shouldst say to him why I came 
from Geshur; it had been better for me for to 
have abiden there. I pray thee that I may come 
to his presence and see his visage, and if he 
remember my wickedness let him slay me. Joab 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



36 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The went in to the King and told to him all these 
History words. Then was Absalom called, and entered 
of David in to the king, and he fell down and worshipped 
the king, and the king kissed him. After this 
Absalom did do make for himself chariots and 
horsemen and fifty men for to go before him, and 
walked among the tribes of Israel ; and greeted 
and saluted them, taking them by the hand, and 
kissed them, by which he gat to him the hearts of 
the people; and said to his father that he had 
avowed to make sacrifice to God in Hebron, and 
his father gave him leave. And when he was 
there he gathered people to him, and made himself 
king, and did do cry that all men should obey and 
wait on him as king of Israel. When David 
heard this he was sore abashed and was fain to 
flee out of Jerusalem. And Absalom came with 
his people and entered into Jerusalem into his 
father's house, and lay by his father's concubines, 
and after pursued his father to depose him. And 
David ordained his people and battle against him, 
and sent Joab, prince of his host, against Absalom, 
and divided his host into three parts, and would 
have gone with them, but Joab counselled that he 
should not go to the battle whatsomever happed, 
and then David bade them to save his son 
Absalom. 

And they went forth and fought, and Absalom 
with his host was overthrown and put to flight. 
And as Absalom fled upon his mule he came 
under an oak, and his hair flew about a bough of 
the tree and held so fast that Absalom hung by his 
hair, and the mule ran forth. There came one to 
Joab and told him how that Absalom hung by his 
hair on a bough of an oak, and Joab said : Why hast 
thou not slain him ? The man said : God forbid 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


37 


that I should set hand on the king’s son ; I heard The 
the king say : keep my son Absalom alive and History 
slay him not. Then Joab went and took three 0 
spears, and fixed them in the heart of Absalom as 
he hung on the tree by his hair, and yet after this 
ten young men, squires of Joab, ran and slew him. 

Then Joab trumped and blew the retreat, and 
retained the people that they should not pursue 
the people flying. And they took the body of 
Absalom and cast it in a great pit, and laid on him 
a great stone. And when David knew that his 
son was slain, he made great sorrow and said : O 
my son Absalom, my son Absalom, who shall 
grant to me that I may die for thee, my son 
Absalom, Absalom my son ! It was told to Joab 
that the king wept and sorrowed the death of his 
son Absalom, and all their victory was turned into 
sorrow and wailing, in so much that the people 
eschewed to enter into the city. Then Joab 
entered into the king and said: Thou hast this 
day discouraged the cheer of all thy servants 
because they have saved thy life, and the lives of 
thy sons and daughters, of thy wives and of thy 
concubines, thou lovest them that hate thee, and 
hatest them that love thee, and showest well this 
day that thou settest little by thy dukes and 
servants; and truly I know now well that if 
Absalom had lived and all we thy servants had 
been slain, thou haddest been pleased. Therefore, 
arise now and come forth and satisfy the people ; or 
else I swear to thee by the good lord that there 
shall not one of thy servants abide with thee till to- 
morrow, and that shall be worse to thee than all the 
harms and evils that ever yet fell to thee. Then 
David the king arose and sat in the gate, and 
anon it was shown to all the people that the king 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



38 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The sat in the gate. And then all the people came in 
History tofore the king, and they of Israel that had been 
or uavia Absalom fled into their tabernacles, and after 
came again unto David when they knew that 
Absalom was dead. 

And after, one Sheba, a cursed man, rebelled 
and gathered people against David. Against 
whom Joab with the host of David pursued, and 
drove him unto a city which he besieged, and by 
the means of a woman of the same city Sheba’s 
head was smitten off and delivered to Joab over 
the wall, and so the city was saved, and Joab 
pleased. After this David called Joab, and bade 
him number the people of Israel, and so Joab 
walked through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan 
to Beersheba, and over Jordan and all the country, 
and there were founden in Israel eight hundred 
thousand strong men that were able to fight and to 
draw sword, and of the tribe of Judah fifty thousand 
fighting men. And after that the people was 
numbered, the heart of David was smitten by our 
Lord and was heavy, and said: I have sinned 
greatly in this deed, but I pray the Lord to take 
away the wickedness of thy servant, for I have 
done follily. David rose on the morn early, and 
the word of our Lord came to Gad the prophet 
saying : that he should go to David and bid him 
choose one of three things that he should say to 
him. When Gad came to David he said that he 
should choose whether he would have seven years 
hunger in his land, or three months he should flee 
his adversaries and enemies, or to have three days 
pestilence. Of these three God biddeth thee 
choose which thou wilt ; now advise thee and 
conclude what I shall answer to our Lord. David 
said to Gad : I am constrained to a great thing, 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


39 


but it is better for me to put me in the hands of The 
our Lord, for his mercy is much more than in 
men, and so he chose pestilence. ¥ 

Then our Lord sent pestilence the time con- 
stitute, and there died of the people from Dan to 
Beersheba seventy thousand men. And when 
the angel extended his hand upon Jerusalem for 
to destroy it, our Lord was merciful upon the 
affliction, and said to the angel so smiting: It 
sufficeth now, withdraw thy hand. David said 
to our Lord when he saw the angel smiting the 
people : I am he that have sinned and done 
wickedly, what have these 6heep done? I be- 
seech thee that thy hand turn upon me and upon 
the house of my father. Then came Gad to 
David and bade him make an altar ip the same 
place where he saw the angel ; and he bought the 
place, and made the altar, and offered sacrifices 
unto our Lord, and our Lord was merciful, and 
the plague ceased in Israel. 

David was old and feeble and saw that his 
death approached, and ordained that his son 
Solomon should reign and be king after him. 
Howbeit that Adonijah his son took on him to 
be king during David’s life. For which cause 
Bathsheba and Nathan came to David, and tofore 
them he said that Solomon should be king, and 
ordained that he should be set on his mule by his 
prophets Nathan, Zadok the priest and Benaiah, 
and brought in to Sion. And there Zadok the 
priest and Nathan the prophet anointed him king 
upon Israel and blew in a trump and said : Live 
the King Solomon. And from thence they 
brought him into Jerusalem and set him upon his 
father’s seat in his father’s throne, and David 
worshipped him in his bed, and said : Blessed be 


Digitized by Google 



40 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the Lord God of Israel that hath suffered me to 
History of 8ee m y 80n j n m y throne and seat. And then 
Solomon Adoni j ah and all th e y th at we re with him 
were afeard, and dreading Solomon ran away, 
and so ceased Adonijah. The days of David 
approached fast that he should die, and did do 
call Solomon before him, and there he commanded 
him to keep the commandments of our Lord and 
walk in his ways, and to observe his ceremonies, 
his precepts and his judgments, as it is written in 
the law of Moses, and said : Our Lord confirm 
thee in thy reign, and send to thee wisdom to rule 
it well. And when David had thus counselled 
and commanded him to do justice and keep God’s 
law, he blesssd him and died, and was buried with 
his fathers. This David was an holy man and 
made the holy psalter, which is an holy book and 
is contained therein the old law and the new law. 
He was a great prophet, for he prophesied the 
coming of Christ, his nativity, his passion, and 
resurrection, and also his ascension, and was great 
with God, yet God would not suffer him to build 
a temple for him, for he had shed man’s blood. 
But God said to him, his son that should reign 
after him should be a man peaceable, and he should 
build the temple to God. And when David had 
reigned forty years king of Jerusalem, over Judah 
and Israel, he died in good mind, and was buried 
with his fathers in the city of David. 

The History of Solomon . 

After David, reigned Solomon his son, which 
was in the beginning a good man and walked in the 
ways and laws of God. And all the kings about 
him made peace with him and was king confirmed. 

Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


4i 


obeyed and peaceable in his possession, and accord- 
ing to his father’s commandment did justice. First 
on Joab that had been prince of his father’s host, 
because he slew two good men by treason and 
guile, that was Abner the son of Ner, and Amasa 
the son of Ithra. And Joab was afeard and 
dreaded Solomon, and fled into the Tabernacle of 
our Lord and held the end of the altar. And 
Solomon sent Benaiah and slew him there, and 
after buried him in his house in desert. And after 
this on a night as he lay in his bed after he had 
sacrificed to our Lord in Gibeon, our Lord 
appeared to him in his sleep saying to him : Ask 
and demand what thou wilt that I may give to 
thee. And Solomon said : Lord, thou hast done 
to my father great mercy ; because he walked in 
thy ways in truth, justice, and a rightful heart, 
thou hast always kept for him thy great mercy, 
and hast given to him a son sitting upon his throne 
as it is this day. And now Lord thou hast made 
me thy servant to reign for my father David. I 
am a little child and know not my going out and 
entering in, and I thy servant am set in the middle 
of the people that thou hast chosen which be 
infinite, and may not be numbered for multitude ; 
therefore Lord give to me thy servant a heart 
docile and taught in wisdom that may judge thy 
people, and discern between good and evil. Who 
may judge this people, thy people that be so many? 
This request and demand pleased much unto God 
that Solomon had asked such a thing. And God 
said to Solomon s Because thou hast required and 
asked this and hast not asked long life, ne riches, 
ne the souls of thine enemies, but hast asked 
sapience and wisdom to discern doom and judg- 
ment, I have given to thee after thy desire and 


The 

History of 
Solomon 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



42 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The request, and I have given to thee a wise heart and 
History of understanding insomuch that there was never none 
So omon 8uc k to f ore> ne never after shall be. And also 
those things that thou hast not asked I have given 
also to thee, that is to say riches and glory, that 
no man shall be like to thee among all the kings 
that shall be after thy days. If thou walk in my 
ways and keep my precepts and observe my com- 
mandments as thy father walked, I shall make thy 
days long. After this Solomon awoke and came 
to Jerusalem, and stood tofore the Ark of our 
Lord and offered sacrifices and victims unto our 
Lord, and made a great feast unto all his servants 
and household. Then came tofore him two 
common women, of which that one said: I beseech 
thee my lord hear me ; this woman and I dwelled 
together in one house, and I was delivered of a 
child in my cubicle, and the third day after she 
bare a child, and was also delivered, and we were 
together and none other in the house but we twain, 
and it was so that this woman’s son was dead in the 
night; for she sleeping, overlaid and oppressed him, 
and she arose in the darkest of the night privily, and 
took my son from the side of me thy servant and 
laid him by her, and her son that was dead she 
laid by me. When I arose in the morning for to 
give milk to my son it appeared dead, whom I 
took beholding him diligently in the clear light, 
understood well anon that it was not my son that 
I had borne. The other woman answered and 
said: It was not so as thou sayest, but my son 
liveth and thine is dead. And contrary that other 
said : Thou liest ; my son liveth and thine is dead. 
Thus in this wise they strove tofore the king. 
Then the king said: This woman saith my son 
liveth and thine is dead, and this answereth, Nay, 

Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


43 


but thy son is dead, and mine liveth. Then the The 
king said : Bring to me here a sword. When History of 
they had brought forth a sword the king said : Solomon 
Divide ye, said he, the living child in two parts, 
and give that one half to that one, and that other 
half to that other. Then said the woman that was 
mother of the living child to the king, for all her 
members and bowels were moved upon her son : I 
beseech and pray thee, ray lord, give to her the 
child alive, and slay him not, and contrary said 
that other woman : Let it not be given to me ne 
to thee, but let it be divided. The king then 
answered and said : Give the living child to this 
woman, and let it not be slain ; this is verily the 
mother. All Israel heard how wisely the king 
had given this sentence and dreaded him, seeing 
that the wisdom of God was in him in deeming of 
rightful dooms. 

After this Solomon sent his messengers to divers 
kings for cedar trees and for workmen, for to make 
and build a temple unto our Lord. Solomon was 
rich and glorious, and all the realms from the river 
of the ends of the Philistines unto the end of 
Egypt were accorded with him, and offered to 
him gifts and to serve him all the days of his life. 

Solomon had daily for the meat of his household 
thirty measures, named chores, of corn, and sixty 
of meal, ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen of pasture 
and an hundred wethers, without venison that was 
taken, as harts, goats, bubals, and other flying fowls 
and birds. He obtained all the region that was 
from Tiphsa unto Azza, and had peace with all 
the kings of all the realms that were in every part 
round about him. In that time Israel and Judah 
dwelled without fear and dread, every each under 
his vine and fig tree from Dan unto Beersheba. 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



44 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The And Solomon had forty thousand racks for the 
^Sodomon ^ or8C8 kis carts, chariots and cars, and twelve 
thousand for horses to ride on, by which prefects 
brought necessary things for the table of king 
Solomon, with great diligence in their time. God 
gave to Solomon much wisdom and prudence in 
his heart, like to the gravel that is in the sea-side, 
and the sapience and wisdom of Solomon passed 
and went tofore the sapience of all them of the 
Orient and of Egypt, and he was the wisest of all 
men, and so he was named. He spake three thousand 
parables, and five thousand songs, and disputed 
upon all manner trees and virtue of them, from the 
cedar that is in Lebanon unto the hyssop that 
groweth on the wall, and discerned the properties 
of beasts, fowls, reptiles and fishes, and there came 
people from all regions of the world for to hear 
the wisdom of Solomon. 

And Solomon sent letters to Hiram, king of 
Tyre, for to have his men to cut cedar trees with 
his servants, and he would yield to them their hire 
and meed, and let him wit how that he would 
build and edify a temple to our Lord. And 
Hiram sent to him that he should have all that he 
desired, and sent to him cedar trees and other 
wood. And Solomon sent to him corn in great 
number, and Solomon and Hiram confederated 
them together in love and friendship. Solomon 
chose out workmen of all Israel the number of 
thirty thousand men of whom he sent to Lebanon 
ten thousand every month, and when ten thousand 
went the others came home, and so two months 
were they at home, and Adonias was overseer and 
commander on them. Solomon had seventy thou- 
sand men that did nothing but bear stone and 
mortar and other things to the edifying of the 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


45 


temple, and were bearers of burdens only, and he The 

had eighty thousand of hewers of stone and masons History of 

in the mountain, without the prefects and masters, Solomon 

which were three thousand three hundred that did 

nothing but command and oversee them that 

wrought. Solomon commanded the workmen to 

make square stones, great and precious, for to lay 

in the foundament, which the masons of Israel and 

masons of Hiram hewed, and the carpenters made 

ready the timber. Then began Solomon the 

temple to our Lord, in the fourth year of his 

reign he began to build the temple. The house 

that he builded had seventy cubits in length, and 

twenty cubits in breadth, and thirty in height, and 

the porch tofore the temple was twenty cubits 

long after the measure of the breadth of the temple, 

and had ten cubits of breadth tofore the face of the 

temple, and for to write the curiosity and work of 

the temple, and the necessaries, the tables and cost 

that was done in gold, silver and latten, it passeth 

my cunning to express and English them. Ye 

that be clerks may see it in the Second Book of 

Kings and the Second Book of Paralipomenon. It 

is wonder to hear the costs and expenses that was 

made in that temple, but I pass over. It was on 

making seven years, and his palace was thirteen 

years ere it was finished. He made in the temple 

an altar of pure gold, and a table to set on the 

loaves of proposition of gold, five candlesticks of 

gold on the right side and five on the left side, and 

many other things, and took all the vessels of gold 

and silver that his father David had sanctified and 

hallowed, and brought them into the treasury of 

the house of our Lord. After this he assembled 

all the noblest and greatest of birth of them of 

Israel, with the princes of the tribes and dukes of 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



46 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the families, for to bring the Ark of God from 
History of the city of David, Sion, into the temple. And 
Solomon t j ie p r j e8t8 an d Levites took the Ark and bare 
it and all the vessels of the sanctuary that were in 
the tabernacle. King Solomon, with all the 
multitude of the children that were there, went 
tofore the Ark and offered sheep and oxen with- 
out estimation and number. 

And the priests set the Ark in the house of our 
Lord in the oracle of the temple, in sancta sancto- 
rum, under the wings of cherubim. In the ark 
was nothing but the two tables of Moses of stone 
which Moses had put in. And then Solomon 
blessed our Lord tofore all the people, and thanked 
him that he had suffered him to make an house 
unto his name, and besought our Lord that he 
whosomever prayed our Lord for any petition in 
that temple, that he of his mercy would hear him 
and be merciful to him. And our Lord appeared 
to him when the edifice was accomplished perfecdy, 
and said to Solomon : I have heard thy prayer 
and thine oration that thou hast prayed tofore me. 
I have sanctified and hallowed this house that thou 
hast edified for to put my name therein for ever- 
more, and my eyes and heart shall be thereon 
always. And if thou walk before me like as thy 
father walked in the simplicity of heart and in equity, 
and wilt do all that I have commanded thee, and 
keep my judgments and laws, I shall set the throne 
of thy reign upon Israel evermore, like as I have 
said to thy father David, saying : There shall not 
be taken away a man of thy generation from the 
reign and seat of Israel. If ye avert and turn 
from me, ye and your sons, not following ne 
keeping my commandments and ceremonies that I 
have showed tofore you, but go and worship 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


47 


strange gods, and honour them, I shall cast away The 
Israel from the face of the earth that I have given History of 
to them, and the temple that I have hallowed to Salomon 
my name, 1 shall cast it away from my sight. 

And it shall be a fable and proverb, and thy house 
an example shall be to all people ; every man that 
shall go thereby shall be abashed and astonied, 
and shall say : Why hath God done thus to this 
land and to thy house ? And they shall answer : 

For they have forsaken their Lord God that 
brought them out of the land of Egypt, and have 
followed strange gods, and them adored and wor- 
shipped, and therefore God hath brought on them 
all this evil : here may every man take ensample 
how perilous and dreadful it is to break the 
commandment of God. 

Twenty year after that Solomon had edified the 
temple of God and his house, and finished it per- 
fectly, Hiram the king of Tyre went for to see 
towns that Solomon had given to him, and they 
pleased him not. Hiram had sent to king 
Solomon an hundred and twenty besants of gold, 
which he had spent on the temple and his house, 
and on the wall of Jerusalem and other towns and 
places that he had made. Solomon was rich and 
glorious that the fame ran, of his sapience and 
wisdom and of his building and dispence in his 
house, through the world, in so much that the 
queen of Sheba came from far countries to see 
him and to tempt him in demands and questions. 

And she came into Jerusalem with much people 
and riches, with camels charged with aromatics 
and gold infinite. And she came and spake to 
king Solomon all that ever she had in her heart. 

And Solomon taught her in all that ever she pur- 
posed tofore him. She could say nothing but that 

VOL. II. o 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



48 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the king answered to her, there was nothing hid 
History of f rom him. The queen of Sheba then seeing all 
Solomon t ^ e 0 f Solomon, the house that he had 

builded, and the meat and service of his table, the 
habitacles of his servants, the order of the ministers, 
their clothing and array, his butlers and officers, 
and the sacrifices that he offered in the house of 
our Lord, when she saw all these things, she had 
no spirit to answer, but she said to king -Solomon : 
The word is true that I heard in my land, of thy 
words and thy wisdom, and I believed not them 
that told it to me, unto the time that I myself 
came and have seen it with mine eyes, and I have 
now well seen and proved that the half was not 
told to me. Thy sapience is more, and thy works 
also, than the tidings that I heard. Blessed be 
thy servants, and blessed be these that stand always 
tofore thee and hear thy sapience and wisdom, and 
thy Lord God be blessed whom thou hast pleased, 
and hath set thee upon the throne of Israel, for 
so much as God of Israel loveth thee and hath 
ordained thee a king for to do righteousness and 
justice. She gave then to the king an hundred 
and twenty besants of gold, many aromatics, and 
gems precious. There were never seen tofore so 
many aromatics ne so sweet odours smelling as 
the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon. 

King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all 
that ever she desired and demanded of him, and 
after returned into her country and land. The 
weight of pure gold that was offered every year 
to Solomon was six hundred and sixty-six talents 
of gold, except that that the merchants offered, and 
all they that sold, and all the kings of Arabia and 
dukes of that land* Solomon made two hundred 
shields of the purest gold and set them in the house 

Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


49 


of Lebanon ; he made him also a throne of ivory The 
which was great and was clad with gold, which History of 
had six grees or steps, which was richly wrought ^ olomon 
with two lions of gold holding the seat above, and 
twelve small lions standing upon the steps, on every 
each twain, here and there. There was never such 
a work in no realm. And all the vessels that king 
Solomon drank of were of gold, and the ceiling of 
the house of Lebanon in which his shields of gold 
were in was of the most pure gold. Silver was of 
no price in the days of king Solomon, for the navy 
of the king, with the navy of Hiram went in 
three years once into Tarsis and brought them 
thence gold and silver, teeth of elephants and 
great riches. The king Solomon was magnified 
above all the kings of the world in riches and wis- 
dom, and all the world desired to see the cheer and 
visage of Solomon, and to hear his wisdom that 
God had given to him. Every man brought to 
him gifts, vessels of gold and silver, clothes and 
armour for war, aromatics, horses and mules every 
year. Solomon gathered together chariots and 
horsemen ; he had a thousand four hundred chariots 
and cars, and twelve thousand horsemen, and were 
lodged in small cities and towns about Jerusalem 
by the king. There was as great abundance and 
plenty of gold and silver in those days in Jerusalem 
as stones or sycamores that grow in the field, and 
horses were brought to him from Egypt and Chao. 

What shall I all day write of the riches, glory 
and magnificence of king Solomon? It was so 
great that it cannot be expressed, for there was 
never none like to him, ne never shall none come 
after him like unto him. He made the book of 
the parables containing thirty-one chapters, the 
book of the Canticles, the book of Ecclesiastes, 


Digitized by 


Google 



50 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The containing twelve chapters, and the book of 
History of Sapience containing nineteen chapters. This king 
Solomon Solomon loved overmuch women, and specially 
strange women of other sects ; as king Pharaoh’s 
daughters and many other of the gentiles, of whom 
God had commanded to the children of Israel 
that they should not have to do with them, ne 
they with their daughters, for God said certainly 
they should turn your hearts to serve their gods. 
To such women Solomon was coupled with most 
burning love. He had seven hundred wives which 
were as queens, and three hundred concubines, and 
these women turned his heart. For when he was 
old he so doted and loved them that they made 
him honour their strange gods, and worshipped 
Ashtareth, Chemosh and Moloch, idols of Zidonia, 
of Moabites, and Ammonites, and made to them 
Tabernacles for to please his wives and concubines, 
wherefore God was wroth with him, and said to 
him : Because thou hast not observed my precepts 
and my commandments that I commanded thee, 
I shall cut thy kingdom and divide it and give it 
to thy servant but not in thy day, I shall not do it 
for love that I had to David thy father ; but from 
the hand of thy son I shall cut it but not all, I 
shall reserve to him one tribe for David’s love, and 
Jerusalem that I have chosen. And after this 
divers kings became adversaries to Solomon, and 
was never in peace after. 

It is said, but I find it not in the Bible, that 
Solomon repented him much of this sin of idolatry 
and did much penance therefor, for he let him be 
drawn through Jerusalem and beat himself with 
rods and scourges, that the blood flowed in the 
sight of all the people. He reigned upon all Israel 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


5i 


in Jerusalem forty years, and died and was buried The 
with his fathers in the city of David, and Reho- 
boam his son reigned after him, boam ° 


The History of Rehoboam . 

After Solomon, reigned his son Rehoboam. 
He came to Sichem and thither came all the 
people for to ordain him king. Jeroboam and all 
the multitude of Israel spake to Rehoboam, and 
said : Thy father set on us an hard yoke and great 
impositions, now thou hast not so much need, there- 
fore less it and minish it, and ease us of the great 
and hard burden and we shall serve thee. Reho- 
boam answered and said : Go ye and come again 
the third day and ye shall have an answer. When 
the people was departed, Rehoboam made a counsel 
of die seniors and old men that had assisted his 
father Solomon whiles he lived, and said to them : 
What say ye ? and counsel me that I may answer 
to the people, which said to Rehoboam : If thou 
wilt obey and agree to this people, and agree to 
their petition, and speak fair and friendly to them, 
they shall serve thee always. But Rehoboam 
forsook the counsel of the old men, and called the 
young men that were of his age, and asked of them 
counsel. And the young men that had been 
nourished with him bade him say to the people in 
this wise : Is not my finger greater than the back 
of my father ? If my father hath laid on you a 
heavy burden, I shall add and put more to your 
burden ; my father beat you with scourges, and I 
shall beat you with scorpions. The third day 
after, Jeroboam and all the people came to Reho- 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



52 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The boam to have their answer, and Rehoboam left the 
History coun8e l 0 f the old men, and said to them like as 
of Job t j ie y 0Un g men had counselled him. And anon 
the people of Israel forsook Rehoboam, and of 
twelve tribes, there abode with him no more but 
the tribe of Judah and Benjamin. And the other 
ten tribes departed and made Jeroboam their king, 
and never returned unto the house of David after 
unto this day. And thus for sin of Solomon, and 
because Rehoboam would not do after the counsel 
of the old men, but was counselled by young men, 
the ten tribes of Israel forsook him, and departed 
from Jerusalem, and served Jeroboam, and ordained 
him king upon Israel. Anon after this, Jeroboam 
fell to idolatry and great division was ever after 
between the kings of Judah and the kings of Israel. 
And so reigned divers kings each after other in 
Jerusalem after Rehoboam, and in Israel after 
Jeroboam. And here I leave all the history and 
make an end of the book of Kings for this time etc. 
For ye that list to know how every king reigned 
after other, ye may find it in the first chapter of 
Saint Matthew which is read on Christmas day in 
the morning tofore Te Deum, which is the genea- 
logy of our Lady. 


Here followed the History of Job , read on the 
frst Sunday of September . 

There was a man in the land of Uz named Job^ 
and this man was simple, rightful and dreading 
God, and going from all evil. He had seven sons 
and three daughters, and his possession was seven 
thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five 
hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred asses, and 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


53 


his family and household passing much and great. 
He was a great man and rich among all the men 
of the orient. And his sons went daily each to 
other house making great feasts, ever each one as 
his day came, and they sent for their three sisters 
for to eat and drink with them. When they had 
thus feasted each other, Job sent to them and 
blessed and sanctified them, and rising every day 
early, he offered sacrifices for them all, saying : 
Lest my children sin and bless not God in their 
hearts. And thus did Job every day. 

On a day when the sons of God were tofore 
our Lord, Satan came and was among them, to 
whom our Lord said : Whence comest thou ? 
Which answered, I have gone round about the 
earth and through walked it. Our Lord said to 
him : Hast thou not considered my servant Job, 
that there is none like unto him in the earth, a 
man simple, rightful, dreading God, and going 
from evil? To whom Satan answered: Doth 
Job dread God idly ? If so were that thou over- 
threwest him, his house and all his substance 
round about, he should soon forsake thee. Thou 
hast blessed the work of his hands, and his 
possession is increased much in the earth, but 
stretch out thy hand a little, and touch all that he 
hath in possession, and he shall soon grudge and 
not bless thee. Then said our Lord to Satan: 
Lo ! all that which he owneth and hath in pos- 
session, I will it be in thy hand and power, but 
on his person ne body set not thy hand. Satan 
departed and went from the face of our Lord. 
On a day as his sons and daughters ate, and drank 
wine, in the house of the oldest brother, there 
came a messenger to Job which said : The oxen 
eared in the plough and the ass pastured in 


The 
History 
of Job 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



54 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the pasture by them, and the men of Sabea ran on 
History them, and smote thy servants, and slew them with 
of Job 8WOr ^ an( i I only escaped for to come and to 
show it to thee. And whiles he spake came 
another and said : The fire of God fell down 
from heaven and hath burnt thy sheep and servants 
and consumed them, and I only escaped for to 
come and show it to thee. And yet whiles he 
spake came another and said : The Chaldees made 
three hosts and have enveigled thy camels and 
taken them, and have slain thy servants with 
sword, and I only escaped for to bring thee word. 
And yet he speaking another entered in and said : 
Thy sons and daughters, drinking wine in the 
house of thy first begotten son, suddenly came a 
vehement wind from the region of desert and 
smote the four corners of the house, which falling 
oppressed thy children, and they be all dead, and 
I only fled for to tell it to thee. Then Job arose, 
and cut his coat, and did do shave his head, and 
falling down to the ground, worshipped and 
adored God, saying: I am come out naked from 
the womb of my mother and naked shall return 
again thereto. Our Lord hath given and our 
Lord hath taken away, as it hath pleased our 
Lord, so it is done, the name of our Lord be 
blessed. In all these things Job sinned not with 
his lips, ne spake nothing follily against our Lord, 
but took it all patiently. 

After this it was so that on a certain day when 
the children of God stood tofore our Lord, Satan 
came and stood among them, and God said to 
him : Whence comest thou ? To whom Satan 
answered : I have gone round the earth, and 
walked through it. And God said to Satan, 
Hast thou not considered my servant Job that 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


55 


there is no man like him in the earth, a man The 
simple, rightful, dreading God, and going from 
evil, and yet retaining his innocency ? Thou 0 
hast moved me against him that I should put him 
to affliction without cause. To whom Satan said : 

Skin for skin, and all that ever a man hath he shall 
give for his soul. Nevertheless, stretch thine hand 
and touch his mouth and his flesh, and thou shalt 
see that he shall not bless thee. Then said God 
to Satan : I will well that his body be in thine 
hand, but save his soul and his life. Then Satan 
departed from the face of our Lord and smote 
Job with the worst blotches and blains from the 
plant of his foot unto the top of his head, which 
was made like a lazar and was cast out and sat on 
the dunghill. Then came his wife to him and 
said : Yet thou abidest in thy simpleness, forsake 
thy God and bless him no more, and go die. 
Then Job said to her : Thou hast spoken like a 
foolish woman; if we have received and taken 
good things of the hand of our Lord, why shall 
we not sustain and suffer evil things ? In all these 
things Job sinned not with his lips. Then three 
ipen that were friends of Job, hearing what harm 
was happed and come to Job, came ever each one 
from his place to him, that one was named Eliphas 
the Temanite, another Bildad the Shuhite, and the 
third, Zophar Naamathite. And when they saw 
him from far they knew him not, and crying they 
wept. They came for to comfort him, and when 
they considered his misery they tare their clothes 
and cast dust on their heads, and sat by him seven 
days and seven nights, and no man spake to him 
a word, seeing his sorrow. Then after that Job 
and they talked and spake together of his sorrow 
and misery, of which S. Gregory hath made a 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



56 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The great book called : The morals of S. Gregory, 
History which is a noble book and a great work, 
of Job B U t I pass over all the matters and return unto 
the end, how God restored Job again to prosperity. 
It was so that when these three friends of Job 
had been long with Job, and had said many things 
each of them to Job, and Job again to them, our 
Lord was wroth with these three men and said to 
them : Ye have not spoken rightfully, as my servant 
Job hath spoken. Take ye therefore seven bulls 
and seven wethers and go to my servant Job and 
offer ye sacrifice for you. Job my servant shall 
pray for you. I shall receive his prayer and shall 
take his visage. They went forth and did as our 
Lord commanded them. And our Lord beheld 
the visage of Job, and saw his penance when he 
prayed for his friends. And our Lord added to 
Job double of all that Job had possessed. All his 
brethren came to him, and all his sisters, and all 
they that tofore had known him, and ate with him 
in his house, and moved their heads upon him, and 
comforted him upon all the evil that God had sent 
to him. And each of them gave him a sheep and 
a gold ring for his ears. Our Lord blessed more 
Job in his last days than he did in the beginning. 
And he had then after fourteen thousand sheep, 
six thousand camels, one thousand yoke of oxen, 
one thousand asses. And he had seven sons and 
three daughters. And the first daughter’s name 
was Jemima, the second Kezia, and the third 
Keren-happuch. There was nowhere found in 
the world so fair women as were the daughters of 
Job. Their father Job gave to them heritage 
among their brethren, and thus Job by his patience 
gat so much love of God, that he was restored 
double of all his losses. And Job lived after, one 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


57 


hundred and forty years, and saw his sons and the The 
sons of his sons unto the fourth generation, and 
died an old man, and full of days. of 


Here followeth the history of Tobit which is read 
the third Sunday of September . 

Tobit of the tribe and of the city of Nephthali, 
which is in the overparts of Galilee upon Aser, 
after the way that leadeth men westward, having 
on his left side the city of Sepheth, was taken in 
the days of Salmanazar, King of the Assyrians, 
and put in captivity, yet he forsook not the way 
of truth, but all that he had or could get he 
departed daily with his brethren of his kindred 
which were prisoners with him. And how be it 
that he was youngest in all the tribe of Nephthali 
yet did he nothing childishly. Also when all 
other went unto the golden calves that Jeroboam, 
King of Israel had made, this Tobit only fled the 
fellowship of them all, and went to Jerusalem into 
the temple of our Lord. And there he adored 
and worshipped the Lord God of Israel, offering 
truly his first fruits and tithes in so much that in 
the third year he ministered unto proselytes and 
strangers all the tithe. Such things and other like 
to these he observed whilst he was a child, and 
when he came to age and was a man he took a 
wife named Anna, of his tribe, and begat on her 
a son, naming after his own name Tobias, whom 
from his childhood he taught to dread God and 
abstain him from all sin. Then after when he 
was brought by captivity with his wife and his son 
into the city of Nineveh with all his tribe, and 
when all ate of the meats of the Gentiles and 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



' 58 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Paynims, this Tobit kept his soul clean and was 
History never defouled in the meats of them. And because 
of Tobit h e remembered our Lord in all his heart, God 
gave him grace to be in the favour of Salmanazar 
the king which gave to him power to go where he 
would. Having liberty to do what he would, he 
went then to all them in captivity and gave to 
them warnings of health. When he came on a 
time in Rages, city of the Jews, he had such gifts 
as he had been honoured with of the king, ten 
besants of silver. And when he saw one Gabael 
being needy which was of his tribe, he lent him 
the said weight of silver upon his obligation. 
Long time after this when Salmanazar the king 
was dead, Sennacherib his son reigned for him, 
and hated, and loved not, the children of Israel. 
And Tobit went unto all his kindred and com- 
forted them, and divided to every each of them as 
he might of his faculties and goods. 

He fed the hungry and gave to the naked 
clothes, and diligently he buried the dead men 
and them that weFe slain. After this when 
Sennacherib returned, fleeing the plague from the 
Jewry, that God had sent him for his blasphemy, 
and he, being wroth, slew many of the children 
of Israel, and Tobit always buried the bodies of 
them, which was told to the king, which com- 
manded to slay him, and took away all his 
substance. Tobit then with his wife and his son 
hid him and fled away all naked, for many loved 
him well. After this, forty-five days, the sons of 
the king slew the king, and then returned Tobit 
unto his house, and all his faculties and goods 
were restored to him again. After this on a high 
festival day of our Lord when that Tobit had a 
good dinner in his house, he said to his son : Go 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


59 


and fetch to us some of our tribe dreading God, The 
that they may come and eat with us. And he 
went forth and anon he returned telling to his °* Tol>lt 
father that one of the children of Israel was slain 
and lay dead in the street. And anon he leapt 
out of his house, leaving his meat, and fasting 
came to the body, took it and bare it in to his 
house privily, that he might secretly bury it when 
the sun went down. And when he had hid the 
corpse, he ate his meat with wailing and dread, 
remembering that word that our Lord said by 
Amos the prophet : The day of your feast shall 
be turned into lamentation and wailing. And when 
the sun was gone down he went and buried him. 

All his neighbours reproved and chid him, saying 
for this cause they were commanded to be slain, 
and unnethe thou escapedst the commandment of 
death, and yet thou buriest dead men. But Tobit, 
more dreading God than the king, took up the 
bodies of dead men and hid them in his house, and 
at midnight he buried them. It happed on a day 
after this that when he was weary of burying dead 
men, he came home and laid him down by a wall 
and slept. And from a swallow’s nest above there 
fell down hot dung of them on his eyes, and he was 
thereof blind. This temptation suffered God to 
fall to him, that it should be an example to them 
that shall come after him of his patience, like as it 
was of holy Job. For from his infancy he dreaded 
ever God and kept his precepts and was not 
grudging against God for his blindness, but he 
abode immovable in the dread of God, giving and 
rendering thankings to God all the days of his life. 

For like as Job was assailed so was Tobit assailed 
of his kinsmen, scorning him and saying to him : 

Where is now thy hope and reward for which 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



6o 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The thou gavest thy alms and madest sepulchres ? 
Tobit blamed them for such words, saying to them : 
1Z In no wise say ye not so, for we be the sons of 
holy men, and we abide that life that God shall 
give to them that never shall change their faith from 
him. Anna his wife went daily to the work of 
weaving, and got by the labour of her hands their 
livelihood as much as she might. Whereof on a 
day she gat a kid and brought it home. When 
Tobit heard the voice of the kid bleating, he said : 
See that it be not stolen, yield it again to the owner, 
for it is not lawful for us to eat ne touch anything 
that is stolen. To that his wife all angry answered : 
Now manifestly and openly is thine hope made 
vain, and thy alms lost. And thus with such and 
like words she chid him. Then Tobit began to 
sigh and began to pray our Lord with tears saying : 
O Lord, thou art rightful, and all thy dooms be 
true, and all thy ways be mercy, truth, and righteous- 
ness- And now, Lord, remember me, and take now 
no vengeance of my sins, ne remember not my tres- 
passes, ne the sins of my fathers. For we have 
not obeyed thy commandments, therefore we be 
betaken in to direption, captivity, death, fables, and 
into reproof and shame to all nations in which thou 
hast dispersed us. And now, Lord, great be thy 
judgments, for we have not done according to thy 
precepts, ne have not walked well tofore thee. 
And now, Lord, do to me after thy will, and 
command my spirit to be received in peace, it is 
more expedient to me to die than to live. 

The same day it happed that Sara, daughter of 
Raguel in the city of Medes, that she was rebuked 
and heard reproof of one of the handmaidens of her 
father. For she had been given to seven men, and 
a devil named Asmodeus slew them as soon as 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


61 


they would have gone to her ; therefore the maid The 
reproved her saying s We shall never see son ne History 
daughter of thee on the earth, thou slayer of thy °* 
husbands. Wilt thou slay me as thou hast slain 
seven men ? With this voice and rebuke she went 
up in the upperest cubicle of the house. And three 
days and three nights she ate not, ne drank not, but 
was continually in prayers beseeching God for to 
deliver her from this reproof and shame. And 
on the third day, when she had accomplished her 
prayer, blessing our Lord she said : Blessed be thy 
name, God of our fathers, for when thou art wroth 
thou shalt do mercy and in a time of tribulation 
thou forgivest sins to them that call to thee. Unto 
thee, Lord, I convert my visage, and unto thee I 
address mine eyes. I ask and require thee that 
thou assoil me from the bond of the reproof and 
shame, or certainly upon the earth keep me. Thou 
knowest well, Lord, that I never desired man, but 
I have kept clean my soul from all concupiscence. 

I never meddled me with players, ne never had part 
of them that walk in lightness. I consented for to 
take an husband with thy dread, but I never gave 
consent to take one with my lust. Or I was un- 
worthy to them or haply they were unworthy to 
me, or haply thou hast conserved and kept me for 
some other man. Thy counsel is not in man’s 
power. This knoweth every man that worshippeth 
thee, for the life of him if it be in probation shall 
be crowned, and if it be in tribulation it shall be 
delivered, and if it be in correction, it shall be 
lawful to come to mercy. Thou hast none delecta- 
tion in our perdition, for after tempest thou makest 
tranquillity, and after weeping and shedding of 
tears thou bringest in exultation and joy. Thy 
name, God of Israel be blessed, world without end. 


Digitized by Google 



62 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The 

History 

ofTobit 


In that same time were the prayers of them 
both heard in the sight of the glory of the high 
God. And the holy angel of God, Raphael, was 
sent to heal them both. Of whom in one time 
were the prayers recited in the sight of our Lord 
God. Then when Tobit supposed his prayers to 
be heard that he might die, he called to him 
his son Tobias, and said to him : Hear, my son, 
the words of my mouth, and set them in thy heart 
as a fundament. When God shall take away my 
soul, bury my body, and thou shalt worship thy 
mother all the days of her life, thou owest to 
remember what and how many perils she hath 
suffered for thee in her womb. When she shall 
have accomplished the time of her life, bury her by 
me. All the days of thy life have God in thy 
mind, and beware that thou never consent to sin, 
ne to disobey ne break the commandments of 
God. Of thy substance do alms, and turn never 
thy face from any poor man, so do that God turn 
not his face from thee. As much as thou 
mayest, be merciful, if thou have much good give 
abundantly, if thou have but little, yet study to 
give and to depart thereof gladly, for thou makest 
to thee thereof good treasure and meed in the day 
of necessity, for alms delivereth a man from all sin 
and from death, and suffereth not his soul to go in 
to darkness. Alms is a great sikerness tofore the 
high God unto all them that do it. Beware, my 
son, keep thee from all fornication, and suffer not 
thyself save with thy wife to know that sin ; and 
suffer never pride to have domination in thy wit, 
ne in thy word, that sin was the beginning of all 
perdition. Whosomever work to thee any thing, 
anon yield to him his meed and hire, let never the 
hire of thy servant ne meed of thy mercenary 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


63 


remain in no wise with thee. That thou hatest to The 
be done to thee of other, see that thou never do to 
an other. Eat thy bread with the hungry and °* A oblt 
needy, and cover the naked with thy clothes. 

Ordain thy bread and wine upon the sepulture of 
a righteous man, but eat it not ne drink it with 
sinners. Ask and demand counsel of a wise man. 

Always and in every time bless God and desire 
of him that he address thy ways, and let all thy 
counsels abide in him. I tell to thee, my son, that 
when thou wert a little child I lent to Gabael ten 
besants of silver, dwelling in Rages the city of 
Medes, upon an obligation, which I have by me. 

And therefore spere and ask how thou mayst go to 
him, and thou shalt receive of him the said weight 
of silver and restore to him his obligation. Dread 
thou not, my son ; though we lead a poor life, we 
shall have much good if we dread God and go 
from sin and do well. Then young Tobias 
answered to his father: All that thou hast com- 
manded me I’shall do, father ; but how I shall get 
this money I wot never ; he knoweth not me, ne 
I know not him ; what token shall I give him ? 

And also I know not the way thither. Then his 
father answered to him and said: I have his 
obligation by me, which when thou shewest him, 
anon he shall pay thee. But go now first and seek 
for thee some true man, that for his hire shall 
go with thee whiles I live, that thou mayest 
receive it. 

Then Tobias went forth and found a fair young 
man girt up and ready for to walk, and not 
knowing that it was the angel of God, saluted 
him and said : From whence have we thee, good 
young man ? And he answered : Of the children 
of Israel. And Tobias said to him: Knowest 

E 


VOL. II. 


Digitized by Google 



64 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The thou the way that leadeth one into the region of 
History Medes ? To whom he answered : I know it well, 
qS Tobit a jj t ^ e j ourne y 8 I have oft walked and have 

dwelled with Gabael our brother which dwelled in 
Rages the city of Medes, which starideth in the 
hill of Ecbathanis. To whom Tobias said: I 
pray thee tary here a while till I have told this to 
my father. Then Tobias went in to his father and 
told to him all these things, whereon his father 
marvelled and prayed him that he should bring him 
in. Then the angel came in and saluted the old 
Tobit and said : Joy be to thee always. And 
Tobit said : What joy shall be to me that sit in 
darkness, and see not the light of heaven. To 
whom the youngling said : Be of strong belief ; it 
shall not be long but of God thou shalt be cured 
and healed. Then said Tobit to him: Mayest 
thou lead my son unto Gabael in Rages city of 
Medes, and when thou comest again I shall restore 
to thee thy meed. And the angel said : I shall 
lead him thither and bring him again to thee. To 
whom Tobit said : I pray thee to tell me of what 
house or of what kindred art thou. To whom 
Raphael the angel said : Thou needest not to ask 
the kindred of him that shall go with thy son, 
but lest haply I should not deliver him to thee 
again : I am Azarias son of great Ananias. Tobit 
answered: Thou art of a great kindred, but I 
pray thee be not wroth, though I would know 
thy kindred. The angel said to him : I shall 
safely lead thy son thither, and safely bring him 
and render him to thee again. Tobit then 
answered saying: Well mote ye walk, and our 
Lord be in your journey, and his angel fellowship 
with you. Then, when all was ready that they 
should have with them by the way, young Tobias 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


65 


took leave of his father and mother, and bade them The 
farewell. When they should depart the mother History 
began to weep and say : Thou hast taken away 0 01 

and sent from us the staff of our old age, would 
God that thilke money had never been for which 
thou hast sent him, our poverty sufficeth enough 
to us that we might have seen our son. Tobit 
said to her : Weep not, our son shall come safely 
again and thine eyes shall see him. I believe that 
the good angel of God hath fellowship with him, 
and shall dispose all things that shall be needful to 
him, and that he shall return again to us with joy. 

With this the mother ceased of her weeping and 
was still. 

Then young Tobias went forth and an hound 
followed him. And the fir c t mansion that they 
made was by the river of Tigris, and Tobias 
went out for to wash his feet, and there came a 
great fish for to devour him, whom Tobias fearing 
cried out with a great voice : Lord, he cometh 
on me, and the angel said to him: Take him by 
the fin and draw him to thee. And so he did 
and drew him out of the water to the dry land. 

Then said the angel to him : Open the fish and 
take to thee the heart, the gall, and the milt, and 
keep them by thee; they be profitable and necessary 
for medicines. And when he had done so he 
roasted of the fish, and took it with them for to 
eat by the way, and the remnant they salted, that it 
might suffice them till they came into the city of 
Rages. Then Tobias demanded of the angel and 
said : I pray thee, Azarias, brother, to tell me 
whereto these be good that thou hast bidden me 
keep. And the angel answered and said : If thou 
take a little of his heart and put it on the coals, 
the smoke and fume thereof driveth away all 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



66 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The manner kind of devils, be it from man or from 
History woman, in such wise that he shall no more come 
of Tobit tQ And Tobias said : Where wilt thou 

that we shall abide ? And he answered and said : 


Hereby is a man named Raguel, a man nigh to 
thy kindred and tribe, and he hath a daughter 
named Sara, he hath neither son ne daughter 
more than her. Thou shalt owe all his substance, 
for thee behoveth to take her to thy wife. Then 
Toby answered and said : I have heard say that 
she hath been given to seven men, and they be 
dead, and I have heard that a devil slayeth them. 
I dread therefore that it might hap so to me, and 
I that am an only son to my father and mother, I 
should depose their old age with heaviness and 
sorrow to hell. Then Raphael the angel said to 
him: Hear me, and I shall show thee where- 
with thou mayst prevail against that devil ; these 
that took their wedlock in such wise that they 
exclude God from them and their mind, and wait 
but to their lust as a horse and mule in whom is 


none understanding, the devil hath power upon 
them. Thou therefore when thou shalt take a 


wife, and enterest into her cubicle, be thou con- 
tinent by the space of three days from her, and 
thou shalt do nothing but be in prayers with her : 
and that same night put the heart of the fish on 
the fire, and that shall put away the devil. The 
second night thou shalt be admitted in copulation 
of holy patriarchs. The third night ye shall 
follow the blessing that sons may be begotten of 
you both, and after the third night thou shalt take 
the virgin with dread of God, more for love of 
procreation of children than for lust of thy body, 
that thou mayst follow the blessing of Abraham in 
his seed. Then they went and entered into 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


67 


Raguel’s house, and Raguel received them joyously, The 
and Raguel, heholding well Tobias, said to Anna 
his wife : How like is this young man unto my of * oblt 
cousin ! And when he had so said he asked them : 

Whence be ye, young men my brethren ? And 
they said: Of the tribe of Nephthalim, of the 
captivity of Nineveh. Raguel said to them: 

Know ye Tobit my brother ? Which said : We 
know him well. When Raguel had spoken much 
good of him, the angel said to Raguel : Tobit of 
whom thou demandest is father of this young man. 

And then went Raguel, and with weeping eyes 
kissed him, and weeping upon his neck said : The 
blessing of God be to thee, my son, for thou art 
son of a blessed and good man. And Anna his 
wife and Sara his daughter wept also. 

After they had spoken, Raguel commanded to 
slay a wether, and make ready a feast. When he 
then should bid them sit down to dinner, Tobias 
said : I shall not eat here this day ne‘ drink but if 
thou first grant to me my petition, and promise to 
me to give me Sara thy daughter. Which when 
Raguel heard he was astonied and abashed, knowing 
what had fallen to seven men that tofore had 
wedded her, and dreaded lest it might happen to 
this young man in like wise. And when he held 
his peace and would give him none answer the angel 
said to him : Be not afeard to give thy daughter 
to this man dreading God, for to him thy daughter 
is ordained to be his wife, therefore none other 
may have her. Then said Raguel: I doubt not 
God hath admitted my prayers and tears in his 
sight, and I believe that therefore he hath made 
you to come to me that these may be joined in one 
kindred after the law of Moses, and now have no 
doubt but I shall give her to thee. And he taking 


Digitized by Google 



68 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the right hand of his daughter delivered it to 
History Tobias saying : God of Abraham, God of Isaac, 
sf Tobit an( j 0 f J aco b be with you, and he conjoin 
you together and fulfil his blessing in you. And 
took a charter and wrote the conscription of the 
wedlock. And after this they ate, blessing our 
Lord God. Raguel called to him Anna his wife 
and bade her to make ready another cubicle. And 
she brought Sara her daughter therein, and she 
wept, to whom her mother said : Be thou strong 
of heart, my daughter, our Lord of heaven give to 
thee joy for the heaviness that thou hast suffered. 
After they had supped, they led the young man to 
her. Tobias remembered the words of the angel, 
and took out of his bag part of the heart of the 
fish, and laid it on burning coals. Then Raphael 
the angel took the devil and bound him in the 
upperest desert of Egypt. Then Tobias exhorted 
the virgin and said to her : Arise, Sara, and let us 
pray to God this day, and to-morrow, and after 
to-morrow, for these three nights we be joined to 
God. And after the third night we shall be in 
our wedlock. We be soothly the children of 
saints, and we may not so join together as people 
do that know not God. Then they both arising 
prayed together instantly that health might be given 
to them. Tobias said: Lord God of our fathers, 
heaven and earth, sea, wells, and floods, and all 
creatures that be in them, bless thee. Thou 
madest Adam of the * slime of the earth, and gavest 
to him for an help Eve, and now, Lord, thou 
knowest that for the cause of lechery I take not 
my sister to wife, but only for the love of posterity 
and procreation of children, in which thy name be 
blessed world without end. Then said Sara : 
Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy, and let us 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


69 


wax old both together in health. And after this The 
the cocks began to crow, at which time Raguel 
commanded his servants to come to him, and they 0 0 1 

together went for to make and delve a sepulchre. 

He said : Lest haply it happen to him as it hath 
happed to the seven men that wedded her. When 
they had made ready the foss and pit, Raguel 
returned to his wife and said to her : Send one of 
thine handmaidens, and let her see if he be dead, that 
he may be buried ere it be light day. And she 
sent forth one of her servants, which entered into 
the cubicle and found them both safe and whole, 
and sleeping together, and she returned and brought 
good tidings. And Raguel and Anna blessed our 
Lord God and said: We bless thee, Lord God of 
Israel, that it hath not happed to us as we supposed ; 
thou hast done to us thy mercy, and thou hast 
excluded from us our enemy pursuing us, thou hast 
done mercy on two only children. Make them, 

Lord, to bless thee to foil, and to offer to thee 
sacrifice of praising and of their health, that the 
university of peoples may know that thou art God 
only in the universal earth. Anon then Raguel 
commanded his servants to fill again the pit that 
they had made ere it waxed light, and bade his 
wife to ordain a feast, and make all ready that were 
necessary to meat. He did do slay two fat kine 
and four wethers, and to ordain meat for all his 
neighbours and friends, and Raguel desired and 
adjured Tobias that he should abide with him 
two weeks. Of all that ever Raguel had in 
possession of goods he gave half part to Tobias, 
and made to him a writing that the other half part 
he should have after the death of him and his wife. 

Then Tobias called the angel to him, which he 
trowed had been a man, and said to him : Azarias, 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



70 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The brother, I pray thee to take heed to my words ; if 
History j make myself servant to thee I shall not be worthy 
0 1 0 11 to satisfy thy providence. Nevertheless I pray 
thee to take to thee the beasts and servants and 
go to Gabael in Rages the city of Medes, and 
render to him his obligation, and receive of them 
the money and pray him to come to my wedding. 
Thou knowest thyself that my father numbereth 
the days of my being out, and if I tarry more his 
soul shall be heavy, and certainly thou seest how 
Raguel hath adjured me, whose desire I may not 
despise. Then Raphael, taking four of the servants 
of Raguel and two camels, went to Rages the city 
of Medes, and there finding Gabael, gave to him 
his obligation and received all the money, and told 
to him of Tobias, son of Tobit, all that was done, 
and made him come with him to the wedding. 
When then he entered the house of Raguel, he 
found Tobias sitting at meat, and came to him and 
kissed him, and Gabael wept and blessed God 
saying : God of Israel bless thee, for thou art son 
of the best man and just, dreading God and doing 
alms, and the blessing be said upon thy wife and 
your parents, and that you may see the sons of 
your sons unto the third and fourth generation, 
and your seed be blessed of the God of Israel, 
which reigneth in secula seculorum. And when all 
had said Amen, they went to the feast. And with 
the dread of God they exercised the feast of their 
weddings. Whiles that Tobias tarried because of 
his marriage, his father Tobit began to be heavy 
saying: Trowest thou wherefore my son tarrieth 
and why he is holden there? Trowest thou that 
Gabael be dead, and no man is there that shall 
give him his money ? 

He began to be sorry and heavy greatly, both 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 71 

he and Anna his wife with him, and began both to 
weep because at the day set he came not home. 
His mother therefore wept with unmeasurable tears, 
and said : Alas, my son, wherefore sent we thee to 
go this pilgrimage ? The light of our eyes, the 
staff of our age, the solace of our life, the hope of 
our posterity, all these only having in thee, we 
ought not to have let thee go from us. To whom 
Tobit said : Be still and trouble thee not, our son 
is safe enough, the man is true and faithful enough 
with whom we sent him. She might in no wise 
be comforted, but every day she went and looked 
and espied the way that he should come if she 
might see him come from far. Then Raguel 
said to Tobias his son-in-law : Abide here with 
me, and I shall send messengers of thy health and 
welfare to Tobit thy father. To whom Tobias 
said : I know well that my father and my mother 
accompt the days, and the spirit is in great pain 
within them. Raguel prayed him with many 
words, but Tobias would in no wise grant him. 
Then he delivered to him Sara his daughter, and 
half part of all his substance in servants, men and 
women, in beasts, camels, in kine and much 
money. And safe and joyful he let him depart 
from him, saying : The angel of God that is holy 
be in your journey, and bring you home whole 
and sound, and that ye may find all things well 
and rightful about your father and mother, and 
that mine eyes may see your sons ere I die. And 
the father and mother taking their daughter kissed 
her and let her depart, warning her to worship her 
husband’s father and mother, love her husband, to 
rule well the meiny, to govern the house and to keep 
herself irreprehensible, that is to say, without reproof. 

When they thus returned and departed, they 


The 
History 
of Tobit 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



72 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The came to Charram, which is the half way to 
History Nineveh, the thirteenth day. Then said the angel 
of Fobit tQ Tobias . Tobias, brother, thou knowest how 
thou hast left thy father, if it please thee we will 
go tofore and let thy family come softly after, 
with thy wife and with thy beasts. This pleased 
well to Tobias; and then said Raphael to Tobias : 
Take with thee of the gall of the fish, it shall be 
necessary. Tobias took of the gall and went 
forth tofore. Anna his mother sat every day by 
the way in the top of the hill, from whence she 
might see him come from far, and whilst she sat 
there and looked after his coming, she saw afar 
and knew her son coming, and running home she 
told to her husband saying : Lo ! thy son cometh. 
Raphael then said to young Tobias: Anon as thou 
enterest in to the house adore thy Lord God, and 
giving to him thankings, go to thy father and 
kiss him. And anon then anoint his eyes with 
the gall of the fish that thou bearest with thee, 
thou shah well know that his eyes shall be opened, 
and thy father shall see the light of heaven and 
shall joy in thy sight. Then ran the dog that 
followed him and had been with him in the way, 
and came home as a messenger, fawning and 
making joy with his tail. And the blind father 
arose and began offending his feet to run to meet 
his son, giving to him his hand, and so taking, kissed 
him with his wife, and began to weep for joy. 
When then they had worshipped God and thanked 
him, they sat down together. Then Tobias 
taking the gall of the fish anointed his father’s 
eyes, and abode as it had been half an hour, and 
the slime of his eyes began to fall away like as it 
had been the white of an ogg, which Tobias took 
and drew from his father’s eyes, and anon he 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


73 


received sight. And they glorified God, that is The 
to wit he and his wife and all they that knew him. History 
Then said Tobit the father : I bless thee. Lord Toblt 
God of Israel, for thou hast chastised me, and 
thou hast saved me, and, lo ! I see Tobias my son. 

After these seven days Sara the wife of his son 
came and entered in with all the family, and the 
beasts whole and sound, camels and much money 
of his wife’s, and also the money that he had 
received of Gabael. And he told to his father 
and mother all the benefits of God that was done 
to him by the man that led him. Then came 
Achiacharus and Nasbas, cousins of Tobias, joying 
and thanking God of all the goods that God had 
showed to him. And seven days they ate together 
making feast, and were glad with great joy. Then 
old Tobit call his son Tobias to him, and said : 

What may we give to this holy man that cometh 
with thee ? Then Tobias answering said to his 
father: Father, what meed may we give to him, 
or what may be worthy to him for his benefits ? 

He led me out and hath brought me whole again, 
he received the money of Gabael ; he did me have 
my wife and he put away the devil from her 5 he 
hath made joy to my parents, and saved myself 
from devouring of the fish, and hath made thee 
see the light of heaven, and by him we be re- 
plenished with all goods ; what may we then 
worthily give to him ? Wherefore I pray thee, 
father, that thou pray him if he vouchsafe to take 
the half of all that I have. Then the father and 
the son calling him took him apart and began to 
pray him that he would vouchsafe to take half the 
part of all the goods that they had brought. Then 
said he to them privily : Bless ye God of heaven 
and before all living people knowledge ye him, for 


Digitized by 


Google 



74 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


# The he hath done to you his mercy. Forsooth to hide 
^e sacrament of the king it is good, but for to show 
o ToUit t j ie wor jof God an( i t0 knowledge them it is 
worshipful. Oration and prayer is good, with 
fasting and alms, and more than to set up treasures 
of gold. For alms delivereth from death, and it 
is she that purgeth sins and maketh a man to find 
everlasting life. Who that do sin and wickedness 
they be enemies of his soul. I show to you there- 
fore the truth and I shall not hide from you the 
secret word. When thou prayedst with tears and 
didst bury the dead men and leftest thy dinner and 
hiddest dead men by day in thine house, and in 
the night thou buriedst them, I offered thy prayer 
unto God. And for as much as thou wert 
accepted tofore God, it was necessary, thou being 
temped, that he should prove thee. And now 
hath our Lord sent me for to cure thee, and 
Sara the wife of thy son I have delivered from 
the devil. I am soothly Raphael the angel, one 
of the seven which stand tofore our Lord God. 
When they heard this they were troubled, and 
trembling fell down on their feces upon the ground. 
The angel said to them : Peace be to you, dread 
you not. F orsooth I was with you by the will of 
God, him alway bless ye and sing ye to him, I 
was seen of you to eat and drink, but I use meat 
and drink invisible, which of men may not be seen. 
It is now therefore time that I return to him which 
sent me. Ye alway bless God and tell ye all his 
marvels. And when he had said this he was 
taken away from the sight of them, and after that 
they might no more see him. Then they fell 
down flat on their faces by the space of three hours 
and blessed God, and arising up they told all the 
marvels of him. Then the older Tobit opening 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


75 


his mouth blessed our Lord and said : Great art The 
thou. Lord, evermore, and thy reign is in to all 
worlds, for thou scourgest and savest, thou leadest °* 
to hell and bringest again, and there is none that 
may flee thy hand. Knowledge and confess you 
to the Lord, ye children of Israel, and in the sight 
of Gentiles praise ye him. Therefore he hath 
disperpled you among Gentiles that know him 
not, that ye tell his marvels, and make them to be 
known. For there is none other God Almighty 
but he ; he hath chastised us for our wickedness 
and he shall save us for his mercy. Take heed 
and see therefore what he hath done to us, and 
with fear and dread, knowledge ye to him, and 
exalt him king of all worlds in your works. I 
soothly in the land of my captivity shall knowledge 
to him, for he hath showed his majesty into the 
sinful people. Confess ye therefore sinners, and 
do ye justice tofore our Lord by believing that he 
shall do to you his mercy, aye soothly, and my 
soul shall be glad in him. AJ1 ye chosen of God, 
bless ye him and make ye days of gladness and 
knowledge ye to him. Jerusalem city of God, 
our Lord hath chastised thee in the works of his 
hands, confess thou to our Lord in his good things 
and bless thou the God of worlds that he may 
re-edify in thee his tabernacle, and that he may call 
again to thee all prisoners and them that be in 
captivity and that thou joy in omnia secula 
seculorum. Thou shalt shine with a bright light, 
and all the ends of the earth shall worship thee. 
Nations shall come to thee from far, and bringing 
gifts shall worship in thee our Lord, and shall 
have thy land into sanctification. They shall call 
in thee a great name, they shall be cursed that 
shall despise thee, and they all shall be condemned 


Digitized by V^jOOQiC 



76 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The that blaspheme thee. Blessed be they that edify 
Hfetory thee, thou shalt be joyful in thy sons, for all shall 
0 oblt be blessed, and shall be gathered together unto our 
Lord. Blessed be they that love thee and that 
joy upon thy peace. My soul, bless thou our Lord, 
for he hath delivered Jerusalem his city. I shall 
be blessed if there be left of my seed for to see 
the clearness of Jerusalem. The gates of Jerusalem 
shall be edified of sapphire and emerald, and all 
the circuit of his walls of precious stone ; all the 
streets thereof shall be paved with white stone and 
clean; and Alleluia shall be sung by the ways 
thereof. Blessed be the Lord that hath exalted 
it that it may be his kingdom in secula seculorum, 
Amen. And thus Tobit finished these words. 
And Tobit lived after he had received his sight 
forty-two years, and saw the sons of his nephews, 
that is, the sons of the sons of his son young 
Tobias. And when he had lived one hundred 
and two years he died, and was honorably buried 
in the city of Nineveh. 

He was fifty-six years old when he lost his 
sight, and when he was sixty years old he received 
his sight again. The residue of his life was in joy, 
and with good profit of the dread of God he 
departed in peace. In the hour of his death he 
called to him Tobias his son, and seven of his 
young sons, his nephews, and said to them : The 
destruction of Nineveh is nigh, the word of God 
shall not pass, and our brethren that be disperpled 
from the land of Israel shall return thither again. 
All the land thereof shall be fulfilled with desert, 
and the house that is burnt therein shall be re-edified, 
and thither shall return all people dreading God. 
And Gentiles shall leave their idols and shall 
come in Jerusalem and shall dwell therein, and all 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


77 


the kings of the earth shall joy in her, worshipping The 
the king of Israel. Hear ye therefore, my sons, History 
me your father, serve ye God in truth and seek °f Judith 
ye that ye do that may be pleasing to him, and 
command ye to your sons that they do righteous 
ness and alms, that they may remember God and 
bless him in all time in truth and in all their virtue. 

Now therefore, my sons, hear me and dwell ye no 
longer here, but whensoever your mother shall die, 
bury her by me and from then forthon dress ye 
your steps that ye go hence, I see well that 
wickedness shall make an end of it. It was so 
then after the death of his mother, Tobias went 
from Nineveh with his wife and his sons, and the 
sons of his sons, and returned unto his wife’s 
father and mother, whom they found in good 
health and good age, and took the cure and charge 
of then), and were with them unto their death, and 
closed their eyes. And Tobias received all the 
heritage of the house of Raguel and saw the sons 
of his sons unto the fifth generation. And when 
he had complished ninety-nine years he died in 
the dread of God, and with joy they buned him. 

All his cognation and all his generation abode in 
good life and in holy conversation, and in such 
wise as they were acceptable as well to God as to 
men, and to all dwelling on the earth. 


Here beginneth the story of Judith which is read the 
last Sunday of October . 

Arphaxad, king of the Medes, subdued into his 
empire many peoples and edified a mighty city, 
which he named Ecbatane, and made it with 
stones 'squared, and polished them. The walls 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



78 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


. The thereof were of height seventy cubits, and of 
History breadth thirty cubits, and the towers thereof 
0 Judith were an hundred cubits high. And he glorified 
himself as he that was mighty in puissance and in 
the glory of his host and of his chariots. Nebu- 
chadnezzar then in the twelfth year of his reign, 
which was king of the Assyrians, and reigned in 
the city of Nineveh, fought against Arphaxad and 
took him in the field, whereof Nebuchadnezzar 
was exalted and enhanced himself, and sent unto 
all regions about and unto Jerusalem till the 
Mounts of Ethiopia, for to obey and hold of him. 
Which all gainsaid him with one will, and without 
worship sent home his messengers void, and set 
nought by him. Then Nebuchadnezzar, having 
them at great indignation, swore by his reign and 
by his throne that he would avenge him on them 
all, and thereupon called all his dukes, princes, and 
men of war, and held a counsel in which was 
decreed that he should subdue all the world 
unto his empire. And thereupon he ordained 
Holofernes prince of his knighthood, and bade 
him go forth, and in especial against them that had 
despised his empire $ and bade him spare no realm 
ne town but subdue all to him. Then Holofernes 
assembled dukes and masters of the strength of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and numbered one hundred and 
twenty thousand footmen, and horsemen shooters 
twelve thousand. And tofore them he commanded 
to go a multitude of innumerable camels laden with 
such things as were needful to the host, as victual, 
gold and silver, much that was taken out of the 
treasury of the kings. And so went to many realms 
which he subdued ; and occupied a great part of the 
orient till he came approaching the land of Israel. 
And when the children of Israel heard thereof they 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


79 


dreaded sore lest he should come among them into The 
Jerusalem and destroy the temple, for Nebuchad- History 
nezzar had commanded that he should extinct all °‘ Judri® 
the gods of the earth, and that no god should be 
named ne worshipped but he himself, of all the 
nations that Holofernes should subdue. 

Eliachim, then priest in Israel, wrote unto all 
them in the mountains that they should keep the 
strait ways of the mountains, and so the children 
of Israel did as the priest had ordained. Then 
Eliachim, the priest, went about all Israel and 
said to them: Know ye that God hath heard 
your prayers, if ye abide and continue in your 
prayers and fastings in the sight of God. Re- 
member ye of Moses, the servant of God, which 
overthrew Amalek trusting in his strength, and in 
his power, in his host, in his helmets, in his 
chariots, and in his horsemen ; not fighting with 
iron but with praying of holy prayers. In like 
wise shall it be with all the enemies of Israel if ye 
persevere in this work that ye have begun. With 
this exhortation they continued praying God. 

They persevered in the sight of God, and also 
they that offered to our Lord were clad with 
sackcloth, and had ashes on their heads, and with 
all their heart they prayed God to visit his people 
Israel. It was told to Holofernes prince of the 
knighthood of the Assyrians that the children of 
Israel made them ready to resist him, and had 
closed the ways of the mountains, and he was burned 
in overmuch fury in great ire. He called all the 
princes of Moab and dukes of Ammon and said to 
them : Say ye to me, what people is this that 
besiege the mountains, or what or how many 
cities have they ? And what is their virtue, and 
what multitude is of them ? Or who is king of 

VOL. II. F 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



8 © 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The their knighthood ? Then Achior, duke of all 
Hjstpjy of them of Ammon, answering said : If thou 
of Judith deigned t0 hear me I shall tell thee truth of this 
people that dwelleth in the mountains* and there 
shall not issue out of my mouth one false word. 
This people dwelled first in Mesopotamia, and was 
of the progeny of the Chaldees, but would not 
dwell there for they would not follow the gods of 
their fathers that were in the land of Chaldees, 
and going and leaving the ceremonies of their 
fathers, which was in the multitude of many gods, 
they honoured one, God of heaven, which com- 
manded them to go thence that they should dwell 
in Canaan. Then after was there much hunger, 
that they descended into Egypt, and there abode 
four hundred years, and multiplied that they might 
not be numbered. When the king of Egypt 
grieved them in his buildings, bearing clay tiles, 
and subdued them, they cried to our Lord, and he 
smote the land of Egypt with divers plagues. When 
they of Egypt had cast them out from them, the 
plagues ceased from them and then they would have 
taken them again and would have called them to 
their service, and they fleeing, their God opened the 
sea to them that they went through dry-foot, in which 
the innumerable host of the Egyptians pursuing 
them were drowned, that there was not one of them 
saved for to tell to them that came after them. 
They passed thus the Red Sea, and he fed them 
with manna forty years, and made bitter waters 
sweet, and gave them water out of a stone. And 
wheresoever this people entered without bow or 
arrow, shield or sword, their God fought for 
them, and there is no man may prevail against 
this people but when they departed from the 
culture and honor of their God. And as oft as 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


81 


they have departed from their God and worshipped The 
other strange gods, so oft have they been over- Histoiy 
come with their enemies. And when they repent J u< ^ 
and come to the knowledge of their sin, and cry 
their God mercy, they be restored again, and 
their God giveth to them virtue to resist their 
enemies. They have Overthrown Cananeum the 
king, Jebusee, Pheresee, Eneum, Etheum and 
Amoreum, and all the mighty men in Esebon, 
and have taken their lands and cities and possess 
them, and shall, as long as they please their God. 

Their God hated wickedness, for tofore this time 
when they went from the laws that their God 
gave to them, he suffered them' to be taken of 
many nations into captivity, and were disperpled. 

And now late they be come again and possess 
Jerusalem wherein is sancta sanctorum, and be 
come over these mountains whereas some of them 
dwell. Now therefore, my lord, see and search if 
there be any wickedness of them in the sight of 
their God, and then let us go to them, for their 
God shall give them into thy hands and they shall 
be subdued under the yoke of thy power. 

And when Achior had said thus, all the great 
men about Holofernes were angry and had thought 
for to have slain him, saying each to other : Who 
is this that may make the children of Israel resist 
the king Nebuchadnezzar and his army and host ? 

Men cowards and without might and without any 
wisdom of war. Therefore that Achior may 
know that he sakh not true, let us ascend the 
mountains, and when the mighty men of them be 
taken let him be slain with them, that all men may 
know that Nebuchadnezzar is god of the earth, 
and that there is none other but he. Then when 
they ceased to speak, Holofernes having indigna- 


Digitized by CjOOQIC 



82 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The tion said to Achior : Because thou hast prophesied 
History to us of the children of Israel saying, that their 
°* J u< *™ God defended them, I shall show to thee that 
there is no god but Nebuchadnezzar, for whom 
we have overcome them all and slain them as one 
man, then shalt thou die with them by the sword 
of the Assyrians, and all Israel shall be put into 
ruin and perdition, and then shall be known that 
Nebuchadnezzar is lord of all the earth, and the 
sword of my knighthood shall pass through thy 
sides. And thou shalt depart hence and go to 
them, and shalt not die unto the time that I have 
them and thee. And when I have slain them 
with my sword thou shalt in like wise be slain with 
like vengeance. After this Holofernes com- 
manded his servants to take Achior, and lead him 
to Bethulia and to put him in the hands of them 
of Israel. And so they took Achior and ascended 
the mountains, against whom came out men of war. 
Then the servants of Holofernes turned aside and 
bound Achior to a tree hands and feet with cords, 
and left him and so returned to their lord. Then 
the sons of Israel coming down from Bethulia 
loosed and unbound him, and brought him to 
Bethulia, and he being set amid the people was 
demanded what he was, and why he was so sore 
there bounden. And he told to them all the 
matter like as it is aforesaid, and how Holofernes 
had commanded him to be delivered unto them of 
Israel. Then all the people fell down on to their 
faces worshipping God, and with great lamentation 
and weeping, with one will made their prayers 
unto our Lord God of heaven, and that he would 
behold the pride of them, and to the meekness of 
them of Israel, and take heed to the faces of his 
hallows and show to them his grace and not 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


83 


forsake them, and prayed God to have mercy on The 
them and defend them from their enemies. And Histoj 
on that other side, Holofernes commanded his °* 
hosts to go up and assail Bethulia, and so went up, 
of footmen one hundred and twenty thousand, 
and twelve thousand horsemen, and besieged 
the town, and took their water from them, in 
so much that they that were in the town were 
in great penury of water, for in all the town was 
not water enough for one day, and such as they 
had was given to the people by measure. Then 
all the people young and old came to Ozias which 
was their prince, with Charmis and Gothoniel, all 
with one voice crying : God the Lord deem 
between us and thee, for thou hast done to us evil 
what thou spakest not peaceably with the Assyrians, 
for now we shall be delivered into the hands of 
them. It is better for us to live in captivity under 
Holofernes and live, than to die here for thirst, 
and see our wives and children die before our 
eyes. And when they had made this piteous 
crying and yelling, they went all to their church, 
and there a long while prayed and cried unto God 
knowledging their sins and wickedness, meekly 
beseeching him to show his grace and pity on 
them. Then at last Ozias arose up, and said 
to the people: Let us abide yet five days, 
and if God send us no rescue ne help us not in that 
time that we may give glory to his name, else we 
shall do as ye have said. And when that Judith 
heard thereof, which was a widow and a blessed 
woman, and was left widow three years and six 
months. 

Alter that Manasses her husband died, anon 
she went into the overest part of her house in 
which she made a privy bed, which she and her 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



84 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The servants closed, and having on her body a hair, had 
fasted all the days of her life save Sabbaths and 
Judith new moonS) an d the feasts of the house of Israel. 
She was a fair woman and her husband had left 
her much riches, with plentiful meiny, and pos- 
sessions of droves of oxen and flocks of sheep, and 
she was a famous woman and dreaded God greatly. 
And when she had heard that Ozias had said, that 
the fifth day the city should be given over if God 
helped them not, she sent for the priests Chambris 
and Charmis and said to them : What is this word 
in which Ozias hath consented that the city should 
be delivered to the Assyrians if within five days 
there come no help to us ? And who be ye that 
tempt the Lord God ? This word is not to stir 
God to mercy but rather to arouse wrath and 
woodness. Ye have set a time of mercy doing by 
God, and in your doom ye have ordained a day 
to him. O good Lord, how patient is he, let us 
ask him for forgiveness with weeping tears; he 
shall not threaten as a man, ne inflame in wrath as 
a son of a man, therefore meek we our souls to 
him and in a contrite spirit and meeked, serve we 
to him, and say we weeping to God, that after his 
will he show to us his mercy, and as our heart is 
troubled in the pride of them, so also of our humble- 
ness and meekness let us be joyful. For we have 
not followed the sin of our fathers that forsook 
their God and worshipped strange gods, where- 
fore they were given and be taken into hideous 
and great vengeance, into sword, ravin, and into 
confusion to their enemies ; we forsooth know no 
other god but him. Abide we meekly the com- 
fort of him, and he shall keep us from our enemies, 
and he shall make all gentiles that arise against 
him, and shall make them without worship the 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



85 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

Lord our God. And now ye brethren, ye that The 
be priests, on whom hangeth the life of the people History 
of God, pray ye unto Almighty God that he make °* 
me steadfast in the purpose that I have proposed. 

Ye shall stand at the gate and I shall go out with 
my handmaid. And pray ye the Lord that he 
steadfast make my soul, and do ye nothing till I 
come again. 

And then Judith went into her oratory, and 
arrayed her with her precious clothing and adorn- 
ments, and took unto her handmaid certain victuals 
such as she might lawfully eat, and when she had 
made her prayers unto God she departed in her 
most noble array toward the gate, whereas Ozias 
and the priests abode her, and when they saw her 
they marvelled of her beauty. Notwithstanding 
they let her go, saying : God of our fathers give 
thee grace and strengthen all the counsel of thine 
heart with his virtue and glory to Jerusalem, and be 
thy name in the number of saints and of righteous 
men. And they all that were there said : Amen 
and, fiat ! fiat ! Then she praising God passed 
through the gate, and her handmaid with her. 

And when she came down the hill, about the 
springing of the day, anon the spies of the 
Assyrians took her saying : Whence comest thou, 
or whither goest thou r The which answered : I 
am a daughter of the Hebrews and flee from them, 
knowing that they shall be taken by you, and come 
to Holofernes for to tell him their privities, and I 
shall show him by what entry he may win them, in 
such wise as one man of his host shall not perish. 

And the men that heard these words beheld her 
visage and wondered of her beauty, saying to her : 

Thou hast saved thy life because thou hast founden 
such counsel, come therefore to our Lord, for 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



86 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


' The when thou shalt stand in his sight he shall accept 
History thee. And they led her to the tabernacle of 
>t j units Holofernes. And when she came before him anon 
Holofernes was caught by his eyes, and his tyrant 
knights said to him : Who despised the people of 
Jews that have so fair women, that not for them 
of right we ought to fight against them ? And so 
Judith seeing Holofernes sitting in his canape that 
was of purple, of gold, smaragdos and precious 
stones within woven, and when she had seen his 
face she honored him, falling down herself unto 
the earth. And the servants of Holofernes took 
her up, he so commanding. Then Holofernes 
said to her : Be thou not afeard ne dread thee not. 
I never grieved ne noyed man that would serve 
Nebuchadnezzar. Thy people soothly, if they 
had not despised me, I had not raised my people 
ne strength against them. Now tell to me the 
cause why thou wentest from them, and that it 
hath pleased thee to come to us. And Judith 
said: Take the words of thine handmaid, and if 
thou follow them, a perfect thing God shall do 
with thee. Forsooth Nebuchadnezzar is the 
living king of the earth, and thou hast his 
power for to chastise all people, for men only serve 
not him, but also the beasts of the field obey 
to him, his might is known over all. And the 
children of Israel shall be yielded to thee, for their 
God is angry with them for their wickedness. 
They be enfamined and lack bread and water, they 
be constrained to eat their horse and beasts, and to 
take such holy things as be forbidden in their law, 
as wheat, wine, and oil, all these things God hath 
showed to me. And they purpose to waste such 
things as they ought not touch, and therefore and 
for their sins they shall be put in the hands of their 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


87 


enemies, and our Lord hath showed me these The 
things to tell thee. And I thine handmaid shall Hietory 
worship God, and shall go out and pray him, and °* 
come in and tell thee what he shall say to me, in 
such wise that I shall bring thee through the 
middle of Jerusalem, and thou shalt have all the 
people of Israel under thee, as the sheep be under 
the shepherd, in so much there shall not an hound 
bark against thee. And because these things be 
said to me by the providence of God, and that God 
is wroth with them, I am sent to tell thee these 
things. 

Forsooth, all these words pleased much to 
Holofemes, and to his people, and they marvelled 
of the wisdom of her. And one said to another. 

There is not such a woman upon earth in sight, in 
fairness, and in wit of words. And Holofemes 
said to her : God hath done well that he hath sent 
thee hither for to let me have knowledge, and if 
thy God do to me these things he shall be my 
God, and thou and thy name shall be great in the 
house of Nebuchadnezzar. Then commanded 
Holofemes her to go in where his treasure lay, and 
to abide there, and to give to her meat from his 
feast, to whom she said that she might not eat of 
his meat, but that she hath brought meat with her 
for to eat. Then Holofemes said: When that 
meat faileth what shall we give to thee to eat? 

And Judith said that she should not spend all till 
God shall do in my hands those things that I have 
thought. And the servants led her into his taber- 
nacle, and she desired that she might go out in the 
night and before day to pray, and come in again. 

And the lord commanded his cubiculers that she 
should go and come at her pleasure three days 
during. And she went out into the valley of 


Digitized by Google 



88 


THE QQLPEN LEGEND 

The Bethulia and baptized her in the water of the well. 

History And she stretched her hands up to the God of 
o juaitn j srae ] 9 praying the good Lord that he would govern 
her way for to deliver hispeople ; and thus she did 
unto the fourth day. Then Holofemes made a 
great feast, and sent a man of his which was 
gelded, named Bagoas, for to entreat Judith to lie 
with his lord, and to come eat and drink with him. 
And Judith said : What am I that should gain- 
say my lord’s desire ? I am at his commandment, 
whatsomever he will that I do, I shall do, and 
please him all the days of my life. And she rose 
and adorned herself with her rich and precious 
clothes, and went in and stood before Holofemes, 
and Holofeme8 , heart was pierced with her beauty, 
and he burned in the lust and desire of her, and 
said to her : Sit down and drink in joy, for thou 
hast found grace before me. Judith said : I shall 
drink my lord, for my life is magnified this day 
before all the days of my life. And she ate ana 
drank such as her handmaid had ordained for her. 
And Holofemes was merry and drank so much 
wine that he never drank so much in one day in 
all his life, and was drunken. And at even, when 
it was night, Holofemes went into his bed,, and 
Bagoas brought Judith in to his chamber and closed 
the door. And when Judith was alone in the 
chamber, and Holofemes lay and slept in overmuch 
drunkenness, Judith said to her handmaid that she 
should stand without forth before the door of the 
privy chamber and wait about, and Judith stood 
before the bed praying with tears and with moving 
of her lips secretly, saying: O Lord God of 
Israel, conform me in this hour to the works of my 
hands, that thou raise up the city of Jerusalem as 
thou hast promised, and that I may perform this 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


89 


that I have thought to do. And when she had The 
thus said, she went to the pillar that was at his Hiatorjr 
bed’s head, and took his sword and loosed it, and °* J 1111 ™ 
when she had drawn it out, she took his hair in 
her hand and said : Confirm me God of Israel in 
this hour, and smote twice in the neck and cut off 
his head, and left the body lie still, and took the 
head and wrapped it in the canape and delivered it 
to her maid, and bade her to put it in her scrip, 
and they two went out after their usage to pray. 

And they passed the tents, and going about the 
valley came to the gate of the city, and Judith said 
to the keepers of the walls : Open the gates, for 
God is with us that hath done great virtue in Israel. 

And anon when they heard her call, they, called 
the priests of the city, and they came running for 
they had supposed no more to have seen her, 
and lighting lights all went about her. 

then entered in and stood up in a high place and 
commanded silence, and said : Praise ye the Lord 
God that forsaketh not men hoping in him ; and in 
me his handwoman, hath fulfilled his mercy that he 
promised to the house of Israel, and hath slain in 
my hand the enemy of his people this night. And 
then she brought forth the head of Holofernes and 
showed it to them saying : Lo ! here the head of 
Holofernes, prince of the chivalry of Assyrians, 
and lo ! the canape of him in which he lay in his 
drunkenhood, where our Lord hath smitten him 
by the hand of a woman. Forsooth God liveth, 
for his angel kept me hence going, there abiding, 
and from thence hither returning, and the Lord 
hath not suffered me, his handwoman, to be 
defouled, but without pollution of sin hath called 
me again to you joying in hi? victory, in my 
escaping and in your deliverance. Knowledge 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



90 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The ye him all for good, for his mercy is everlasting, 
Hfetonr world without end. And all they, honouring our 
of Judith L or d, said to her: The Lord bless thee in his 
virtue, for by thee he hath brought our enemies to 
naught. Then Ozias, the prince of the people, 
said to her : Blessed be thou of the high God 
before all women upon earth, and blessed be the 
Lord that made heaven and earth, that hath 
addressed thee in the wounds of the head of the 
prince of our enemies. After this Judith bade 
that the head should be hanged up on the walls, 
and at the sun rising every man in his arms issue 
out upon your enemies, and when their spies 
shall see you, they shall run into the tent of their 
prince, to raise him and to make him ready to 
fight, and when his lords shall see him dead, they 
shall be smitten with so great dread and fear that 
they shall flee, whom ye then shall pursue, and 
God shall bring them and tread them undeVyour 
feet. Then Achior seeing the virtue of the s God 
of Israel, left his old heathen’s customs ‘ and 
believed in God, and was circumcised in his privy 
member, and put himself to the people of Israel, 
and all the succession of his kindred unto this 
day. Then at the springing of the day they hung 
the head of Holofernes on the walls, and every 
man took his arms and went out with great noise, 
which thing seeing, the spies ran together to the 
tabernacle of Holofernes, and came making noise 
for to make him to arise, and that he should 
awake, but no man was so hardy to knock or 
enter into his privy chamber. But when the 
dukes and leaders of thousands came, and other, 
they said to the privy chamberlains: Go and 
awake your lord, for the mice be gone out of 
their caves and be ready to call us to battle. 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 91 

Then Bagoas his bawd, went into his privy 
chamber and stood before the curtain, and clapped 
his hands together, weening he had slept with 
Judith. And when he perceived no moving of 
him, he drew the curtain and seeing the dead 
body of Holofemes, without head, lying in his 
blood, cried with great voice, weeping and rending 
his clothes, and went in to the tabernacle of Judith 
and found her not, and started out to the people 
and said : A woman of the Hebrews hath made 
confusion in the house of Nebuchadnezzar, she 
hath slain Holofemes, and he is dead, and she 
hath his head with her. And when the princes 
and captains of the Assyrians heard this, anon 
they rent their clothes, and intolerable dread fell 
on them, and were sore troubled in their wits and 
made a horrible cry in their tents. And when all 
the host had heard how Holofemes was beheaded, 
counsel and mind flew from them, and with great 
trembling for succour began to flee, in such wise 
that none would speak with other, but with their 
heads bowed down fled for to escape from the 
Hebrews, whom they saw armed coming upon 
them, and departed fleeing by fields and ways of 
hills and valleys. And the sons of Israel, seeing 
them fleeing, followed them, crying with trumps 
and shouting after them, and slew and smote down 
all them that they overtook. And Ozias sent 
forth unto all the cities and regions of Israel, and 
they sent after all the young men and valiant to 
pursue them by sword, and so they did unto the 
uttermost coasts of Israel. The other men soothly, 
that were in Bethulia, went in to the tents of the 
Assyrians, and took all the prey that the Assyrians 
had left, and when the men that had pursued them 
were returned, they took all their beasts and all 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



92 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the movable goods and things that they had left, 
History 80 much that every man from the most to the least 
of Judith were ma d e r i c h by the prey that they took. Then 
Joachim the high bishop of Jerusalem came unto 
Bethulia, with all the priests, for to see Judith, and 
when she came tofore them all, they blessed her 
with one voice, saying : Thou glory of Jerusalem, 
thou gladness of Israel, thou the worship doing of 
our people, thou didst manly, and thine heart is com- 
forted because thou lovedst chastity and knewest no 
man after the death of thy husband, and therefore 
the hand of God hath comforted thee. And there- 
fore thou shalt be blessed world without end, and 
all the people said : Fiat! fiat! be it done, be it done. 
Certainly the spoils of the Assyrians were unne- 
the gathered and assembled together in thirty days, 
of the people of Israel, but all the proper riches 
that were appertaining to Holofemes and could be 
found that had been his, they were given to Judith 
as well gold, silver, gems, clothes, as all other 
appurtenances to household ; and all was delivered 
to her of the people, and the folks, with women 
and maidens, joyed in organs and harps. Then 
Judith sang this song unto God saying : Begin 
ye in timbrels, sing ye to the Lord in cymbals, 
mannerly sing to him a new psalm. Fully joy ye, 
and inwardly call ye his name, and so forth. And 
for this great miracle and victory all the people 
came to Jerusalem for to give laud, honour, and 
worship unto our Lord God. And after they 
were purified they offered sacrifices, vows, and 
behests unto God, and the joy of this victory was 
solemnised during three months, and after that, 
each went home again into his own city and house, 
and Judith returned into Bethulia, and was made 
more great and clear to all men of the land of Israel. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


93 


She was joined to the virtue of chastity, so that The 
she knew no man all the days of her life after the history 
death of Manasses, her husband, and dwelled in °* 
the house of her husband an hundred and five 
years, and she left her demoiselle free. And after 
this she died and is buried in Bethulia and all the 
people bewailed her seven days. During her life 
after this journey was no trouble among the Jews, 
and the day of this victory of the Hebrews was 
accepted for a feastful day, and hallowed of the 
Jews and numbered among their feasts unto this 
day. 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE LIFE OF S. ANDREW 


After the feasts of our Lord Jesu Christ tofore set in 
order follow the legends of Saints 9 and first oj 
S. Andrew . 

The Life Andrew is expounded, and is as much as to say 
of S. as fair, or answering unto strength, and it is said 
^ n ^ rcw of andor, that is as much to say as strength ; or 
Andrew is said thus, as antipos of ana, which is 
to say high, and of tropos which is conversion, so 
that Andrew is to say, a man highly converted, 
and in heaven addressed unto his maker. He 
was fair in his life, answering in wisdom and in 
doctrine, strong in pain and converted high in 
glory. The priests and deacons of Achaia wrote 
his passion like as they had seen it with their eyes. 

Andrew and some other disciples were called 
three times of our Lord. He called them first in 
the knowledging of him, as when S. Andrew was 
with John die Baptist, his master, and another 
disciple; he heard that John said: Lo! here 
the Lamb of God ; and then he went anon with 
another disciple, and came to Jesu Christ and 
abode with him all that day. And then S. 
Andrew found Simon, his brother, and brought 
him to Jesu Christ, and the next day following 
they went to their craft of fishing. And after 
this he called them the second time by the stagne 
of Gennesereth, which is named the sea of Galilee. 

94 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


95 


He entered into the ship of Simon and of Andrew, The Life 
and there was taken great multitude of fish, and of S. 
he called James and John, which were in another Aodrew 
ship, and they followed him, and after went into 
their proper places. 

After this he called them from their fishing, and 
said : Come, follow me, I shall make you fishers 
of men. Then they left their ships and nets, and 
followed him, and sifter this they abode with him, 
and went no more to their own houses. And 
howbeit he called Andrew and some other to be 
apostles, of which calling, Matthew saith in the 
third chapter: He called to him them that he 
would. And after the ascension of our Lord, the 
apostles were departed, and Andrew preached in 
Scythia and Matthew in Murgondy. And the 
men of* this country refused utterly the preaching 
of S. Matthew, and drew out his eyes, and cast 
him in prison fast bounden. In the meanwhile an 
angel, sent from our Lord, and commanded him 
to go to S. Matthew into Murgondy, and he 
answered that he knew not the way. And then 
the angel commanded him that he should go unto 
the seaside, and that he should enter into the first 
ship that he should find, and so he did gladly, in 
accomplishing the commandment, and went into 
the city by the leading of the angel, and had wind 
propitious. And when he was come he found the 
prison open, where S. Matthew was in ; and when 
he saw him he wept sore and worshipped him; 
and then our Lord rendered and gave again to 
S. Matthew his two eyes and his sight. And 
then S. Matthew departed from thence and came 
into Antioch, and S. Andrew abode in Murgondy, 
and they of the country were wroth that S. 

Matthew was so escaped. Then took they S. 

VOL. II. g 

Digitized by Google 



96 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life Andrew and drew him through the places, his 
ofS. hands bounden in such wise that the blood ran 
Andrew out# He prayed for them to Jesu Christ, and 
converted them by his prayer; and from thence 
he came to Antioch. This that is said of the 
blinding of S. Matthew, I suppose that it is not 
true, nor that the evangelist was not so infirm, but 
that he might get for his sight that S. Andrew gat 
for him so lightly. 

It was so that a young man came and followed 
S. Andrew, against the will of all his parents ; 
and on a time his parents set fire on the house 
where he was with the apostle, and when the 
flame surmounted right high, the child took a 
brush full of water and sprinkled withal the fire, 
and anon the fire quenched. And then his^friends 
and parents said : Our son is made an enchanter. 
And as they would have gone up by the ladders, 
they were suddenly made blind, that they saw not 
the ladders, and then one of them recried and 
said : Wherefore enforce ye you against them ? 
God fighteth for them and ye see it not. Cease 
ye and leave off, lest the ire of our Lord fall on 
you. Then many of them that saw this believed 
in our Lord, and the parents died within forty 
days after, and were put in one sepulchre. 

There was a woman with child, joined in wed- 
lock with a homicide who was troubled greatly 
upon her deliverance ; and at the time of childing 
she might not be delivered. She bade her sister 
to go to Diana and pray to her that she help me. 
She went and prayed, and Diana said to her, 
which was the devil in an idol: Wherefore 
prayest thou to me? I may not help ne profit 
thee, but go unto Andrew the apostle which may 
help thee and thy sister. And she went to him. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


97 


and brought him to her sister, which travailed in The Life 
great pain, and began to perish. And the apostle S. 
said to her : By good right thou sufFerest this pain ; 
thou conceivedst in treachery and sin, and thou 
counselledst with the devil. Repent thee, and 
believe in Jesu Christ, and thou shalt be anon 
delivered of thy child. And when she believed 
and was repentant, she was delivered of her child, 
and the pain and sorrow passed and ceased. 

An old man called Nicholas by name, went unto 
the apostle and said to him : Sir, I have lived fifty 
years, and always in lechery. And I took on a 
time a gospel, in praying God that he would give 
me from then forthon continence. But I am 
accustomed in this sin, and full of evil delectation, 
in such wise that I shall return to this sin accus- 
tomed. On a time that I was inflamed by luxury, 

I went to the bordel, and forgat the gospel upon 
me, and anon the foul woman said: Go hence 
thou old man, for thou art an angel of God, touch 
me not, nor come not near me, for I see marvel 
upon thee. And I was abashed of the word of 
the woman, and I remembered that I had the 
gospel upon me, wherefore I beseech thee to pray 
God for me and for my health. And when 
S. Andrew heard this he began to weep, and 
prayed from tierce unto nones. And when he 
arose he would not eat, and said : I shall eat no 
meat till I know whether our Lord shall have pity 
of this old man. And when he had fasted five 
day 8, a voice came to S. Andrew and said to him : 

Andrew, thy request is granted for the old man, 
for like as thou hast fasted and made thyself lean, 
so shall he fast and make himself lean by fastings 
for to be saved. And so he did, for he fasted 
six months to bread and water, and after that he 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



98 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life rested in peace and good works. Then came a 
of S. yoice that said : I have gotten Nicholas by thy 
prayers whom I had lost. 

A young Christian man said to S. Andrew : 
My mother saw that I was fair, and required me 
for to have to do sin with her ; and when I would 
not consent to her in no manner, she went to the 
judge, and would return and lay to me the sin of so 
great a felony. Pray for me that I die not so un- 
truly ; for when I shall be accused I shall hold my 
peace and speak not one word, and have liefer to 
die than to defame and slander my mother so 
foully. Thus came he to judgment, and his 
mother accused him, saying that he would have 
defouled her. And it was asked of him oft if it 
was so as she said, and he answered nothing. 
Then said S. Andrew to her : Thou art most 
cruel of all women, which for the accomplishment 
of thy lechery wilt make thy son to die. Then 
said this woman to the provost : Sir, sith that my 
son came, and accompanied with this man, he 
would have done his will with me, but I withstood 
him that he might not. And anon the provost and 
judge commanded that the son should be put in a 
sack anointed with glue, and thrown into the 
river, and S. Andrew to be put in prison till he 
had advised him how he might torment him. But 
S. Andrew made his prayer to God, and anon 
came an horrible thunder, which feared them all, 
and made the earth to tremble strongly, and the 
woman was smitten with the thunder unto the 
death. And the other prayed the apostle that they 
might not perish, and he prayed for them, and the 
tempest ceased. Thus then the provost believed 
in God, and all his meiny. 

After this, as the apostle was in the city of Nice, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


99 


the citizens said to him that there were seven devils The Life 
without the city, by the highway, which slew all ©f S. 
them that passed forthby. And the apostle ™® rew 
commanded them to come to him, which came in 
the likeness of dogs, and sith he commanded them 
that they should go whereas they should not grieve 
ne do harm to any man ; and anon they vanished 
away. And when the people saw this they 
received the faith of Jesu Christ. And when 
the apostle came to the gate of another city there 
was brought out a young man dead. The apostle 
demanded what was befallen him, and it was told 
him that seven dogs came and strangled him. 

Then the apostle wept and said : O Lord God, I 
know well that these were the devils that I put out 
of Nice 5 and after said to the father of him that was 
dead : What wilt thou give to me if I raise him ? 

And he said : I have nothing so dear as him, I 
shall give him to thee. And anon the apostle 
made his prayers unto almighty God, and raised 
him from death to life, and he went and followed 
him. 

On a time there were forty men by number, 
which were coming by the sea, sailing unto the 
apostle, for to receive of him the doctrine of the 
faith. And the devil raised and moved a great 
storm and so horrible a torment that all they were 
drowned together. And when their bodies were 
brought tofore the apostle, he raised them from 
death to life anon, and there they said all that was 
befallen to them. And therefore it is read in an 
hymn that he rendered the life to young men 
drowned in the sea. And the blessed S. Andrew, 
whilst he was in Achaia, he replenished all the 
country with churches and converted the people to 
the faith of Jesu Christ and informed the wife of 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



ioo THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life .flLgeas, which was provost and judge of the town, 
of S. in the faith, and baptized her. And when iEgeas 
Andrew h ear d this he came into the city of Patras and 
constrained the Christians to sacrifice. And S. 
Andrew came unto him, and said : It behoveth 
thee which hast deserved to be a judge, to know 
thy judge which is in heaven, and he so known, to 
worship him, and so worshipping, withdraw thy 
courage from the false gods. And -flEgeas said : 
Thou art Andrew that preachest a false law, 
which the princes of Rome have commanded to be 
destroyed. To whom Andrew said : The princes 
of Rome knew never how the son of God came 
and taught and informed them that the idols be 
devils, and he that teacheth such things angereth 
God, and he, so angered, departeth from them 
that he heareth them not, and therefore be they 
caitiffs of the devil and be so illused and deceived 
that they issue out of the body all naked, and bear 
nothing with them but sins. 

And JEgeas said to him : These be the vanities 
that your Jesus preached, which was nailed on the 
gallows of the cross. To whom Andrew said : 
He received with his agreement the gibbet of the 
cross, not for his culp and trespass, but for our 
redemption. And -dEgeas said: When he was 
delivered of his disciple, taken and holden with the 
Jews, and crucified by the knyghts, how sayst thou 
that it was by his agreement ? Then S. Andrew 
began to show by five reasons that Jesu Christ 
received death by his own agreement and will, 
forasmuch as he came tofore his passion, and said 
to his disciples that it should be, when he said : 
We shall go up to Jerusalem, and the son of the 
maid shall be betrayed. And also for that Peter 
would withdraw him, he reproved him, and Said : 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


IOI 


Go after me, Sathanas. And also for that he The Life 
showed that he had power to suffer death, and to °f S, 
rise again when he said : I have power to put away ^ a ^ rcw 
my soul and to take it again. And also for that 
he knew tofore him that betrayed him, when he 
gave him hia supper, and showed him not. And 
also for that he chose the place where he should 
be taken, for he knew well that the traitor should 
come. And S. Andrew said that he had been at 
all these things, and yet he said more, that the 
mystery of the cross was great. To whom ^Egeas 
said : It may not be said mystery, but torment, and 
if thou wilt not grant to my sayings, truly- 1 shall 
make thee prove this mystery. And Andrew said 
to him: If I doubted the gibbet of the cross I 
would not preach die glory thereof. I will that 
thou hear the mystery, and if thou knew and 
believedst on it thou shouldst be saved. Then he 
showed to him the mystery of the cross, and 
assigned five reasons. The first is this: Foras- 
much as the first man that deserved death was 
because of the tree, in breaking the commandment 
of God, then is it thing convenable that the second 
man should put away that death, in suffering the 
same on the tree. The second was that, he that 
was made of earth not corrupted, and was breaker 
of the commandment, then was it thing convenable 
that he that should repel this default, should be 
born of a virgin. The third ; for so much as 
Adam had stretched his hand disordinately to the 
fruit forbidden, it was thing convenable that the 
new Adam should stretch his hands on the cross. 

The fourth ; for so much as Adam had tasted 
sweedy the fruit forbidden, it is therefore reason 
that it be put away by thing contrary ; so that Jesu 
Christ was fed with bitter gall. The fifth ; for- 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



102 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
Andrew 


asmuch as Jesu Christ gave to us his immortality, 
it is thing reasonable, that he take our mortality. 
For if Jesu Christ had not been dead, man had 
never been made immortal. And then said ALgeas : 
Tell to thy disciples such vanities, and obey thou 
to me, and make sacrifice unto the Gods almighty. 
And then said S. Andrew : I offer every day unto 
God Almighty, a lamb without spot, and after that 
he is received of all the people, so liveth he and is 
all whole. Then demanded ALgeas how that might 
be. And Andrew said : Take the form for to be 
a disciple, and thou shalt know it well. I shall 
demand thee, said -dSgeas, by torments. Then he 
being all angry, commanded that he should be en- 
closed in prison, and on the morn he came to 
judgment, and the blessed S. Andrew unto the 
sacrifice of the idols. And ALgeas commanded to 
be said to him : If thou obey not to me, I shall do 
hang thee on the cross, for so much as thou hast 
praised it. And thus as he menaced him of many 
torments S. Andrew said to him: Think what 
torment that is most grievous that thou mayst do 
to me, and the more I suffer, the more I shall be 
agreeable to my king, because I shall be most firm 
in the torments and pain. Then commanded JEge as 
that he should be beaten of twenty-one men, and 
that he should be so beaten, bounden by the feet 
and hands unto the cross, to the end that his pain 
should endure the longer. And when he was led 
unto the cross, there ran much people thither 
saying : The blood of the innocent is damned with- 
out cause. And the apostle prayed them that they 
should not empesh nor let his torment ne martyr- 
dom. And when he saw the cross from far he 
saluted it, and said: All hail cross which art 
dedicate in the body of Jesu Christ, and wert 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 103 

adorned with the members of him, as of precious 
stones. Tofore that our Lord ascended on thee, 
thou wert the power earthly, now thou art the love 
of heaven ; thou shalt receive me by my desire, I 
come to thee surely and gladly so that thou receive 
me gladly as disciple of him that hung on thee. 
For I have alway worshipped thee and have desired 
thee to embrace. O thou cross which hast received 
beauty and noblesse of the members of our Lord, 
whom I have so long desired and curiously loved, 
and whom my courage hath so much desired and 
coveted, take me from hence, and yield roe to my 
master, to the end that he may receive me by thee. 
And in thus saying, he despoiled and unclad him, 
and gave his clothes unto the butchers. And then 
they hung him on the cross, like as to them was 
commanded. And there he lived two days, and 
preached to twenty thousand men that were there. 
Then all the company . swore the death of A£geas, 
and said : The holy man and debonair ought not 
to suffer this. Then came thither ALgeas for to 
take him down off the cross. And when Andrew 
saw him he said : Wherefore art thou come to me, 
iEgeas ? If it be for penance thou shalt have it, 
and if it be for to take me down, know thou for 
certain thou shalt not take me hereof alive 5 for I 
see now my lord and king that abideth for me. 
Therewith they would have unbound him, and 
they might in nowise touch him for their arms 
were bynomen and of no power. And when the 
holy S. Andrew saw that the world would have 
taken him down off the cross he made this orison 
hanging on the cross, as S. Austin saith in the 
book of penance : Sire, suffer me not to descend 
from this cross alive, for it is time that thou com- 
mand my body to the earth, for I have born long 


The Life 
of S. 
Andrew 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



io 4 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life the charge, and have so much watched upon that 
of S. w hich was commanded to me, and have so long 
rew travailed, that I would now be delivered of this 
obedience, and be taken away from this agreeable 
charge, I remember that it is much grievous, in 
proud bearing, in doubting, unsteadfast in nourishing, 
and have gladly laboured in the refraining of them. 
Sire, thou knowest how oft the world hath entended 
to withdraw me from the purity of contemplation, 
how oft he hath entended to awake me from the 
sleep of my sweet rest, how much and how qft 
times he hath made me to sorrow, and as much 
as I have had might I have resisted it right 
debonairly in fighting against it, and have by thy 
work and aid surmounted it : and I require of thee 
just and debonair guerdon and reward, and that 
thou command that I go not again thereto, but I 
yield to thee that which thou hast delivered me. 
Command it to another and empesh me no more, 
but keep me in the resurrection, so that I may 
receive die merit of my labour. Command my body 
unto the earth, so that it behoveth no more to 
wake, but let it be stretched freely to thee, which 
art fountain of joy never failing. And when he 
had said this, there came from heaven a right great 
shining light, which environed him by the space of 
half an hour, in such wise that no man might see 
him. And when this light departed he yielded 
and rendered therewith his spirit. And Maxi- 
milla, the wife of -/Egeas, took away the body of 
the apostle, and buried it honourably. And ere 
that -rfEgeas was come again to his house, he was 
ravished with a devil by the way, and died tofore 
them all. And it is said that out of the sepulchre 
of S. Andrew cometh manna like unto meal, and 
oil which hath a right sweet savour and odour. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


105 


And by that is shewed to the people of the The Life 
country when there shall be plenty of goods. For ®f S- 
when ther coraeth but little of manna, the earth AIM “ CW 
shall bring forth but little fruit, and when it cometh 
abundantly, the earth bringeth forth fruit plente- 
ously. And this might well happen of old time, 
for the body of him was transported into Constanti- 
nople. 

There was a bishop that led an holy and religious 
life, and loved S. Andrew by great devotion, and • 
worshipped him above all other saints, so that in 
all his works he remembered him every day, and 
said certain prayers in the honour of God and S. 

Andrew, in such wise that the enemy had envy on 
him, and set him for to deceive him with all his f 

malice, and transformed him into the form of a 
right fair woman, and came to the palace of the 
bishop, and said that she would be confessed to him. 

And the bishop bade her to go confess her to his 
penitencer, which had plain power of him. And 
she sent him word again that she would not reveal 
nor show the secrets of her confession to none but 
to him, and so the bishop commanded her to come; 
and she said to him : Sir, I pray thee that thou 
have mercy on me 5 I am so as ye see in the years 
of my youth, and a maid, and was deliciously 
nourished from my infancy, and bom of royal 
lineage, but I am come alone, in a strange habit ; 
for my father which is a right mighty king would 
give me to a prince by marriage ; whereto I answer 
that I have horror of all beds of marriage, and I 
have given my virginity to Jesu Christ for ever, 
and therefore I may not consent to carnal copula- 
tion. And in the end he constrained me so much 
that I must consent to his will or suffer divers 
torments; so that I am fled secretly away, and 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



10 6 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life had liefer be in exile, than to break and corrupt 
m y f a ith to my spouse. And because I hear the 

A “ rew praising of your right holy life, I am fled unto you 
and to your guard, in hope that I may find with 
you place of rest, whereas I may be secret in 
contemplation, and eschew the evil perils of this 
present life, and flee the diverse tribulations of the 
world. Of which thing the bishop marvelled him 
greatly, as well for the great noblesse of her lineage, 
as for the beauty of her body, for the burning of 
the great love of God, and for the honest fair 
speaking of this woman. So that the bishop 
answered to her, with a meek and pleasant voice : 
Daughter, be sure and doubt nothing ; for he for 
whose love thou hast despised thyself and these 
things, shall give to thee the great thing. In this 
time present is little glory or joy, but it shall be in 
time to come. And I which am sergeant of the 
same, offer me to thee, and my goods ; and choose 
thee an house where it shall please thee, and I 
will that thou dine with me this day. And she 
answered and said : Father, require of me no such 
thing, for by adventure some evil suspicion might 
come thereof. And also the resplendour of your 
good renomee might be thereby impaired. To 
whom the bishop answered : We shall be many 
together, and I shall not be with you alone, and 
therefore there may be no suspicion of evil. Then 
they came to the table, and were set, that one 
against that other, and the other folk here and 
there, and the bishop entendeth much to her, and 
beheld her alway in the visage, and he marvelled 
of her great beauty. And thus as he fixed his 
eyes on her his courage was hurt, and the ancient 
enemy, when he saw the heart of him, hurt [him] 
with a grievous dart. And this devil apperceivea 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


107 


it and began to increase her beauty more and more, 
insomuch that the bishop was then ready for to 
require her to sin when he might. 

Then a pilgrim came and began to smite strongly 
at the gate or door, and they would not open it. 
Then he cried and knocked more strongly; and 
the bishop asked of the woman if she would that 
the pilgrim should enter. And she said; Men 
should ask first of him a question, grievous enough, 
and if he could answer thereto, he should be received, 
and if he could not, he should abide without, and 
not come in, as he that were not worthy but 
unwitting. And all agreed to her sentence, and 
enquired which of them were sufficient to put the 
question. And when none was found sufficient, 
the bishop said : None of us is so sufficient as ye, 
dame, for ye pass us all in fair speaking, and shine in 
wisdom more than we all ; propose ye the question. 
Then she said : Demand ye of him, which is the 
greatest marvel that ever God made in little space. 
And then one went and demanded the pilgrim. 
The pilgrim answered to the messenger that it was 
the diversity and excellence of the faces of men : 
for among all so many men as have been sith the 
beginning of the world unto the end, two men 
might not be found of whom their feces were like 
and semblable in all things. And when the answer 
was heard, all they marvelled and said that this 
was a very and right good answer of the question. 
Then the woman said : Let the second question 
be proposed to him, which shall be more grievous 
to answer to, for to prove the better the wisdom of 
him, which was this : Whether the earth is higher 
than all the heaven ? And when it was demanded 
of him the pilgrim answered : In the heaven 
imperial where the body of Jesu Christ is, which 


The Life 
of S. 
Andrew 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



ioS 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life is form of our flesh, he is more high than all the 
of S. heaven. Of this answer they marvelled all when 
rew the messenger reported it, and praised marvellously 
his wisdom. Consequently she said the third 
question, which was more dark and grievous to 
assoil. For to prove the third time his wisdom, 
and that then he be worthy to be received at the 
bishop’s table, demand and ask of him; How 
much space is from the abysm unto the same 
heaven. Then the messenger demanded of the 
pilgrim, and he answered him : Go to him that 
sent thee to me and ask of him this thing, for he 
knoweth better than I, and can better answer to it, 
for he hath measured this space when he fell from 
heaven into the abysm, and I never measured it. 
This is nothing a woman but it is a devil which 
hath taken the form of a woman. And when the 
messenger heard this, he was sore afraid and told 
tofore them all this that he had heard. And when 
the bishop heard this and all other, they were sore 
afraid. And anon forthwith, the devil vanished 
away tofore their eyes. 

And after, the bishop came again to himself, 
and reproved himself bitterly, weeping, repenting 
and requiring pardon of his sin, and sent a 
messenger for to fetch and bring in the pilgrim, 
but he found him never after. Then the bishop 
assembled the people, and told to them the manner 
of this thing, and prayed them that they would all 
be in orisons and prayers, in such wise that our Lord 
would show to some person who this pilgrim was 
which had delivered him from so great peril. And 
then it was showed that night to the bishop that it 
was S. Andrew which had put him in the habit 
of a pilgrim for the deliverance of him. Then 
began the bishop more and more to have devo- 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


109 


tion and remembrance to S. Andrew than he The Life 
had tofore. S* 

The provost of a city had taken away a field Nicholas 
from the church of S. Andrew, and by the prayer 
of the bishop he was fallen into a strong fever. 

And then he prayed the bishop that he would pray 
for him, and he would again yield the field. And 
when the bishop had prayed for him, and he had 
his health, he took the field again. Then the 
bishop put himself to prayer and orisons, and 
brake all the lamps of the church, and said: 

There shall none of them be lighted till that our 
Lord hath venged him on his enemy, and that the 
church have recovered that which she hath lost. 

And then the provost was strongly tormented with 
fevers, and sent to the bishop by messengers that 
he should pray for him, and he would yield again 
his field and another semblable. Then the bishop 
answered : I have heretofore prayed for him, and 
God heard and granted my prayer, and when he 
was whole, he took from me again the field. And 
then the provost made him to be borne to the 
bishop, and constrained him for to enter into the 
church for to pray. And the bishop entered into 
the church, and anon the provost died, and the 
field was re-established unto the church. Et sic 
est finis. 


Here beginneth the life of S» Nicholas the Bishop . 

Nicholas is said of Nichos, which is to say 
victory, and of laos, people, so Nicholas is as 
much as to say as victory of people, that is, 
victory of sins, which be foul people. Or else 
he is said, victory of people, because he en- 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



no 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life seigned and taught much people by his doctrine 
of S' to overcome vices and sins. Or Nicholas 
Nicholas * g 0 f Nichor, that is the resplendour or 
shining of the people, for he had in him things 
that make shining and clearness. After this 
S. Ambrose saith : The word of God, very con- 
fession, and holy thought, make a man clean. 
And the doctors of Greece write his legend, and 
some others say that Methodius the patriarch 
wrote it in Greek, and John the deacon translated 
it into Latin and ad jousted thereto many things. 

Nicholas, citizen of the city of Patras, was bom 
of rich and holy kin, and his father was Epiphanes 
and his mother Johane. He was begotten in the 
first flower of their age, and from that time forthon 
they lived in continence and led an heavenly life. 
Then the first day that he was washed and bained, 
he addressed him right up in the bason, and he 
would not take the breast nor the pap but once on 
the Wednesday and once on the Friday, and in his 
young age he eschewed the plays and japes of other 
young children. He used and haunted gladly holy 
church ; and all that he might understand of holy 
scripture he executed it in deed and work after 
his power. And when his father and mother were 
departed out of this life, he began to think how he 
might distribute his riches, and not to the praising 
of the world but to the honour and glory of God. 
And it was so that one, his neighbour, had then 
three daughters, virgins, and he was a nobleman : 
but for the poverty of them together, they were 
constrained, and in very purpose to abandon them 
to the sin of lechery, so that by the gain and 
winning of their infamy they might be sustained. 
And when the holy man Nicholas knew hereof he 
had great horror of this villainy, and threw by 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


hi 


night secretly into the house of the man a mass of The life 
gold wrapped in a cloth. And when the man °f S. 
arose in the morning, he found this mass of gold, Nichotai 
and rendered to God therefor great thankings, and 
therewith he married his oldest daughter. And a 
little while after this holy servant of God threw in 
another mass of gold, which the man found, and 
thanked God, and purposed to wake, for to know 
him that so had aided him in his poverty. And 
after a few days Nicholas doubled the mass of 
gold, and cast it into the house of this man. He 
awoke by the sound of the gold, and followed 
Nicholas, which fled from him, and he said to 
him : Sir, flee not away so but that I may see and 
know thee. Then he ran after him more hastily, 
and knew that it was Nicholas ; and anon he 
kneeled down, and would have kissed his feet, but 
the holy man would not, but required him not to 
tell nor discover this thing as long as he lived. 

After this the bishop of Mirea died and other 
bishops assembled for to purvey to this church a 
bishop. And there was, among the others, a 
bishop of great authority, and all the election was 
in him. And when he had warned all for to be 
in fastings and in prayers, this bishop heard that 
night a voice which said to him that, at the hour 
of matins, he should take heed to the doors of the 
church, and him that should come first to the 
church, and have the name of Nicholas they 
should sacre him bishop. And he showed this to 
the other bishops and admonished them for to be 
all in prayers ; and he kept the doors. And this 
was a marvellous thing, for at the hour of matins, 
like as he had been sent from God, Nicholas arose 
tofore all other. And the bishop took him when 
he was come and demanded of him his name. 

K 


VOL. II. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



1X2 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life And he, which was simple as a dove, inclined his 
of S. head, and said : I have to name Nicholas. Then 
Nicholas bishop said to him : Nicholas, servant and 
friend of God, for your holiness ye shall be bishop 
of this place. And sith they brought him to the 
church, howbeit that he refused it strongly, yet 
they set him in the chair. And he followed, as 
he did tofore in all things, in humility and honesty 
of manners. He woke in prayer and made his 
body lean, he eschewed company of women, he 
was humble in receiving all things, profitable in 
speaking, joyous in admonishing, and cruel in 
correcting. 

It is read in a chronicle that, the blessed Nicholas 
was at the Council of Nice ; and on a day, as a 
ship with mariners were in perishing on the sea, 
they prayed and required devoutly Nicholas, 
servant of God, saying : If those things that we 
have heard of thee said be true, prove them now. 
And anon a man appeared in his likeness, and 
said : Lo ! see ye me not ? ye called me, and then 
he began to help them in their exploit of the sea, 
and anon the tempest ceased. And when they 
were come to his church, they knew him without 
any man to show him to them, and yet they had 
never seen him. And then they thanked God 
and him of their deliverance. And he bade them 
to attribute it to the mercy of God, and to their 
belief, and nothing to his merits. 

It was so on a time that all the province of S. 
Nicolas suffered great famine, in such wise that 
victual failed. And then this holy man heard say 
that certain ships laden with wheat were arrived in 
the haven. And anon he went thither and prayed 
' the mariners that they would succour the perished 
at least with an hundred muyes of wheat of every 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



. THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


n 3 


ship. And they said : Father we dare not, for it The Life 
is meted and measured, and we must give reckon- o£S. 
ing thereof in the garners of the Emperor in Nicholas 
Alexandria. And the holy man said to them: 

Do this that I have said to you, and I promise, in 
the truth of God, that it shall not be lessed or 
minished when ye shall come to the garners. And 
when they had delivered so much out of every 
ship, they came into Alexandria and delivered the 
measure that they had received. And then they 
recounted the miracle to the ministers of the 
Emperor, and worshipped and praised strongly 
God and his servant Nicholas. Then this holy 
man distributed the wheat to every man after that 
he had need, in such wise that it sufficed for 
two years, not only for to sell, but also to sow. 

And in this country the people served idols 
and worshipped the false image of the cursed 
Diana. And to the time of this holy man, many 
of them had some customs of the paynims, for to 
sacrifice to Diana under a sacred tree; but this 
good man made them of all the country to cease 
then these customs, and commanded to cut off the 
tree. Then the devil was angry and wroth against 
him, and made an oil that burned, against nature, 
in water, and burned stones also. And then he 
transformed him in the guise of a religious woman, 
and put him in a little boat, and encountered 
pilgrims that sailed in the sea towards this holy 
saint, and areasoned them thus, and said : I would 
fain go to this holy man, but I may not, wherefore 
I pray you to bear this oil into his church, and for 
the remembrance of me, that ye anoint the walls of 
the hall; and anon he vanished away. Then 
they saw anon after another ship with honest 
persons, among whom there was one like to S. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


114 

The Life Nicholas, which spake to them softly : What hath 
of S. this woman said to you, and what hath she 

Nicholas b r0U gh t ? And they told to him all by order. 
And he said to them : This is the evil and foul 
Diana; and to the end that ye know that I say 
truth, cast that oil into the sea. And when they 
had cast it, a great fire caught it in the sea, and 
they saw it long burn against nature. Then they 
came to this holy man and said to him: Verily 
thou art he that appeared to us in the sea and 
deliveredst us from the sea and awaits of the devil. 

And in this time certain men rebelled against 
the emperor; and the emperor sent against them 
three princes Nepotian, Ursyn, and Apollyn. And 
they came into the port Adriatic, for the wind, 
which was contrary to them; and the blessed 
Nicholas commanded them to dine with him, for 
he would keep his people from the ravin that they 
made. And whilst they were at dinner, the 
consul, corrupt by money, had commanded three 
innocent knights to be beheaded. And when the 
blessed Nicholas knew this, he prayed these three 
princes that they would much hastily go with him. 
And when they were come where they should be 
beheaded, he found them on their knees, and 
blindfold, and the righter brandished his sword 
over their heads. Then S. Nicholas embraced 
with the love of God, set him hardily against the 
righter, and took the sword out of his hand, and 
threw it from him, and unbound the innocents, and 
led them with him all safe. And anon he went 
to the judgment to the consul, and found the gates 
closed, which anon he opened by force. And the 
consul came anon and saluted him : and this holy 
man having this salutation in despite, said to 
him : Thou enemy of God, corrupter of the law, 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


”5 


wherefore hast thou consented to so great evil and The Life 
felony, how darest thou look on us ? And when 
he had sore chidden and reproved him, he Wlc “ 0 * M 
repented, and at the prayer of the three princes 
he received him to penance. After, when the 
messengers of the emperor had received his bene- 
diction, they made their gear ready and departed, 
and subdued their enemies to the empire without 
shedding of blood, and sith returned to die emperor, 
and were worshipfully received. And after this 
it happed that some other in the emperor’s house 
had envy on the weal of these three princes, and 
accused them to the emperor of high treason, and 
did so much by prayer and by gifts that they 
caused the emperor to be so full of ire that he 
commanded them to prison, and without other 
demand, he commanded that they should be slain 
that same night. And when they knew it by 
their keeper, they rent their clothes and wept 
bitterly ; and then Nepotian remembered him how 
S. Nicholas had delivered the three innocents, 
and admonested the others that they should require 
his aid and help. And thus as they prayed S. 

Nicholas appeared to them, and after appeared to 
Constantine the emperor, and said to him : Where- 
fore hast thou taken these three princes with so 
great wrong, and hast judged them to death 
without trespass ? Arise up hastily, and command 
that they be not executed, or I shall pray to God 
that he move battle against thee, in which thou 
shalt be overthrown, and shalt be made meat to 
beasts. And the emperor demanded : What art 
thou that art entered by night into my palace and 
durst say to me such words ? And he said to 
him : I am Nicholas bishop of Mirea. And in 
like wise he appeared to the provost, and feared 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



n6 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life him, saying with a fearful voice : Thou that hast 
of S« lost mind and wit, wherefore hast thou consented 

Nidiolas t0 thg (leath of innocents ? Go forth anon and do 
thy part to deliver them, or else thy body shall rot, 
and be eaten with worms, and thy meiny shall be 
destroyed. And he asked him: Who art thou 
that so menacest me ? And he answered : Know 
thou that I am Nicholas, the bishop of the city of 
Mirea. Then that one awoke that other, and 
each told to other their dreams, and anon sent for 
them that were in prison, to whom the emperor 
said : What art magic or sorcery can ye, that ye 
have this night by illusion caused us to have such 
dreams? And they said that they were none 
enchanters ne knew no witchcraft, and also that 
they had not deserved the sentence of death. 
Then the emperor said to them: Know ye well 
a man named Nicholas ? And when they heard 
speak of the name of the holy saint, they held up 
their hands towards heaven, and prayed our Lord 
that by the merits of S. Nicholas they, might be 
delivered of this present peril. And when the 
emperor had heard of them the life and miracles of 
S. Nicholas, he said to them : Go ye forth, and 
yield ye thankings to God, which hath delivered 
you by the prayer of this holy man, and worship 
ye him ; and bear ye to him of your jewels, and 
pray ye him that he threaten me no more, but that 
he pray for me and for my realm unto our Lord. 
And a while after, the said princes went unto the 
holy man, and fell down on their knees humbly at 
his feet, saying : Verily thou art the sergeant of 
God, and the very worshipper and lover of Jesu 
Christ. And when they had all told this said 
thing by order, he lift up his hands to heaven and 
gave thankings and praisings to God, and sent 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



TOE GOLDEN LEGEND 


117 

again the princes, well informed, into their The Life 
countries. Sj 

And when it pleased our Lord to have him Nlcll0l * s 
depart out this world, he prayed our Lord that he 
would send him his angels ; and inclining his head 
he saw the angels come to him, whereby he knew 
well that he should depart, and began this holy 
psalm : In te domine speravi, unto, in manus tuas, 
and so saying : Lord, into thine hands I commend 
my spirit, he rendered up his soul and died, the 
year of our Lord three hundred and forty-three, 
with great melody sung of the celestial company. 

And when he was buried in a tomb of marble, a 
fountain of oil sprang out from the head unto his 
feet ; and unto this day holy oil issueth out of his 
body, which is much available to the health of 
sicknesses of many men. And after him in his see 
succeeded a man of good and holy life, which by 
envy was put out of his bishopric. And when 
he was out of his see the oil ceased to run, and 
when he was restored again thereto, the oil ran 
again. 

Long after this the Turks destroyed the city of 
Mirea, and then came thither forty-seven knights 
of Bari, and four monks showed to them the 
sepulchre of S. Nicholas. And they opened it and 
found the bones swimming in the oil, and they 
bare them away honourably into the city of Bari, 
in the year of our Lord ten hundred and eighty- 
seven. 

There was a man that had borrowed of a Jew a 
sum of money, and sware upon the altar of S. 

Nicholas that he would render and pay it again as 
soon as he might, and gave none other pledge. 

And this man held this money so long, that the 
Jew demanded and asked his money, and he said 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


11$ 

The Life that he had paid him. Then the Jew made him 
40 come tofore the law in judgment, and the oath 
0 was given to the debtor. And he brought with 
him an hollow staff, in which he had put the 
money in gold, and he leant upon the staff. And 
when he should make his oath and swear, he 
delivered his staff to the Jew to keep and hold 
whilst he should swear, and then sware that he 
had delivered to him more than he ought to him. 
And when he had made the oath, he demanded 
his staff again of the Jew, and he nothing knowing 
of his malice delivered it to him. Then this 
deceiver went his way, and anon after, him list 
sore to sleep, and laid him in the way, and a cart 
with four wheels came with great force and slew 
him, and brake the staff with gold that it spread 
abroad. And when the Jew heard this, he came 
thither sore moved, and saw the fraud, and many 
said to him that he should take to him the gold ; 
and he refused it, saying, But if he that was dead 
were not raised again to life by the merits of S. 
Nicholas, he would not receive it, and if he came 
again to life, he would receive baptism and 
become Christian. Then he that was dead arose, 
and the Jew was christened. 

Another Jew saw the virtuous miracles of S. 
Nicholas, and did do make an image of the saint, 
and set it in his house, and commanded him that he 
should keep well his house when he went out, and 
that he should keep well all his goods, saying to him : 
Nicholas, lo ! here be all my goods, I charge thee 
to keep them, and if thou keep them not well, I 
shall avenge me on thee in beating and tormenting 
thee. And on a time, when the Jew was out, 
thieves came and robbed all his goods, and left, 
unborne away, only the image. And when the 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 119 

Jew came home he found him robbed of all his The Life 
goods. He areasoned the image saying these 
words : Sir Nicholas, I had set you in my house Ntc “ 0las 
for to keep my goods from thieves, wherefore have 
ye not kept them ? Ye shall receive sorrow and 
torments, and shall have pain for the thieves. I 
shall avenge my loss, and refrain my woodness in 
beating thee. And then took the Jew the image, 
and beat it, and tormented it cruelly. Then 
happed a great marvel, for when the thieves 
departed the goods, the holy saint, like as he had 
been in his array, appeared to the thieves, and said 
to them: Wherefore have I been beaten so cruelly 
for you and have so many torments? See how 
my body is hewed and broken 5 see how that the 
red blood runneth down by my body ; go ye fast 
and restore it again, or else the ire of God 
Almighty shall make you as to be one out of his 
wit, and that all men shall know your felony, and 
that each of you shall be hanged. And they said : 

Who art thou that sayest to us such things ? And 
he said to them : I am Nicholas the servant of 
Jesu Christ, whom the Jew hath so cruelly beaten 
for his goods that ye bare away. Then they were 
afeard, and came to the Jew, and heard what he 
had done to the image, and they told him the 
miracle, and delivered to him again all his goods. 

And thus came the thieves to the way of truth, 
and the Jew to the way of Jesu Christ. A man, 
for the love of his son, that went to school for to 
learn, hallowed, every year, the feast of S. 

Nicholas much solemnly. On a time it happed 
that the father had do make ready the dinner, and 
called many clerks to this dinner. And the devil 
came to the gate in the habit of a pilgrim for to 
demand alms; and the father anon commanded 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



120 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life his son that he should give alms to the pilgrim. 

He followed him as he went for to give to him 
1 0 alms, and when he came to the quarfox the devil 
caught the child and strangled him. And when 
the father heard this he sorrowed much strongly 
and wept, and bare the body into his chamber, and 
began to cry for sorrow, and say : Bright sweet 
son, how is it with thee ? S. Nicholas, is this the 
guerdon that ye have done to me because I have 
so long served you ? And as he said these words, 
and other semblable, the child opened his eyes, 
and awoke like as he had been asleep, and arose 
up tofore all, and was raised from death to life. 

Another nobleman prayed to S. Nicholas that 
he would, by his merits, get of our Lord that he 
might have a son, and promised that he would 
bring his son to the church, and would offer up to 
him a cup of gold. Then the son was born and 
came to age, and the father commanded to make a 
cup, and the cup pleased him much, and he re- 
tained it for himself, and did do make another 
of the same value. And they went sailing in 
a ship toward the church of S. Nicholas, and 
when the child would have filled the cup, he fell 
into the water with the cup, and anon was lost, 
and came no more up. Yet nevertheless the 
father performed his avow, in weeping much 
tenderly for his son; and when he came to the 
altar of S. Nicholas he offered the second cup, 
and when he had offered it, it fell down, like as 
one had cast it under the altar. And he took it 
up and set it again upon the altar, and then yet 
was it cast further than tofore and yet he took it 
up and remised it the third time upon the altar ; 
and it was thrown again further than tofore. Of 
which thing all they that were there marvelled, and 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 121 

men came for to see this thing. And anon, the 
child that had fallen in the sea, came again prestly 
before them all, and brought in his hands the first 
cup, and recounted to the people that, anon as he 
was fallen in the sea, the blessed S. Nicholas came 
and kept him that he had none harm. And thus 
his father was glad and offered to S. Nicholas 
both the two cups. 

There was another rich man that by the merits 
of S. Nicholas had a son, and called him : Deus 
dedit, God gave. And this rich man did do 
make a chapel of S. Nicholas in his dwelling- 
place ; and did do hallow every year the feast of 
S. Nicholas. And this manor was set by the land 
of the Agarians. This child was taken prisoner, 
and deputed to serve the king. The year following, 
and the day that his father held devoutly the feast 
of S. Nicholas, the child held a precious cup tofore 
the king, and remembered his prise, the sorrow of 
his friends, and the joy that was made that day in 
the house of his father, and began for to sigh sore 
high. And the king demanded him what ailed 
him and the cause of his sighing ; and he told him 
every word wholly. And when the king knew it 
he said to him : Whatsomever thy Nicholas do or 
do not, thou shalt abide here with us. And 
suddenly there blew a much strong wind, that 
made all the house to tremble, and the child was 
ravished with the cup, and was set tofore the gate 
where his father held the solemnity of S. Nicholas, 
in such wise that they all demeaned great joy. 

And some say that this child was of Normandy, 
and went oversea, and was taken by the sowdan, 
which made him oft to be beaten tofore him. 
And as he was beaten on a S. Nicholas day, and 
was after set in prison, he prayed to S. Nicholas 


The Life 
of S. 
Nicholas 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



122 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The as well for his beating that he suffered, as for the 
tioafof ^ eat J°y ^ at was wont to have on that day of 
mr Lady Nicholas. And when he had long prayed and 
sighed he fell asleep, and when he awoke he found 
himself in the chapel of his father, whereas was 
much joy made for him. Let us then pray to 
this blessed saint that he will pray for us to our 
Lord Jesu Christ which is blessed in secula 
seculorum. Amen. 


Here follow eth the Conception of our Blessed Lady . 
Of the feast of the Conception of our Blessed 
Lady . Maria invenisti graciam apud Dominum . 
Luca primo capitulo . 

When the angel Gabriel had greeted our Lady 
for to show to her the blessed conception of our 
Lord, for to take from her all doubts and dreads, 
he comforted her in saying the words aforesaid : 
Mary, thou hast found grace at the Lord. There 
be four manners of people, of which the two be 
good, and the two be evil. For some there be 
that seek not God nor his grace, as people out of 
the belief, of whom may be said as it is written : 
Who that believeth not on his Lord God shall die 
perpetually. And other there be that seek God 
and his grace, but they find it not, for they seek it 
not as they ought to do, as covetous men that set 
all their love in havoir and in solace of the world. 
Such people be likened to them that seek flowers 
in winter : well seek they flowers in winter that 
seek God and his grace in the covetise of the 
world, which is so cold of all virtues that it 
quencheth all the devotion of the love of God. 
And well is called the world winter in holy 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 123 

scripture ; for its evils and vices make men sinners 
and cold to serve God. And therefore saith the 
Holy Ghost to the soul that is amorous, Canticorum 
cap. ii. : Arise up thou my fair soul, the winter is 
past. Jam enim hiems transiit. For thou hast 
vanquished the temptations of the world which kele 
my love, and therefore come into my realm where 
thou shalt find deduite of all flowers of the 
summer, thereas the sinners may not come, because 
they seek not God as they ought to do by very 
repentance of heart. And therefore saith our 
Lord, Johannis cap. vii. Quseretis me et non 
invenietis. Item Johannis cap viii. Et quaeretis 
me et in peccato vestro moriemini. Ye seek me 
and find me not. Item : So ye seek me and in 
sin shall ye die. The third manner of people 
that seek not God, and yet nevertheless they find 
him 5 they be children that die in their innocency 
and be purged by baptism. Of whom God said 
by his prophet Isaiah, cap. lxv. Invenerunt qui non 
quaesierunt me. I am found of them that sought 
me not; and that is for default of age. The 
fourth manner of people that seek God and find 
him, be they that set all their desire to serve God 
and love him, like as the blessed Virgin Mary, 
that sith she was in her infancy, she put her ever 
in the service of God and love of him, and vowed 
to him chastity, afore all other women. And 
therefore with right, might the angel well say to 
her : Maria, invenisti graciam apud dominum : 
Mary, thou hast found grace at God our Lord. 
We find in the scripture that this glorious Virgin 
Mary hath found grace in three manners 5 for hen 
coming was long afore prophesied, and her birth 
annunciat and showed by the angel ; and in the 
womb of her mother ere she was born, sanctified 


The 
Concep- 
tion of 
our Lady 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



124 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The and hallowed. First her coming was showed and 
Concep- prophesied in many manners, and by many figures, 
our Lady ^ or Balaam prophesied, Numeri cap. xxiv 
y Orietur Stella ex Jacob, et consurget virga de 
Israel. That is to say, that the Virgin Mary 
shall be born of the lineage of Jacob patriarch. It 
is a custom that when folk will praise a person, 
they will compare him to a valiant man, like as it 
is said commonly of a hardy man: This is a 
right Alexander ; and of a simple man : This is a 
, right Job. Thus Balaam the prophet compared 
I our Lady to a star for three causes. First for 
\ that she is adorned and giveth beauty to all human 
| creatures like as the star doth on the firmament, 
f for she hath opened to us the gate of paradise; 

like as it is sung in holy church : Paradisi porta 
: per Evam cunctis clausa est, et per beatam Virginem 
| Mariam iterum patefacta est: The gate of paradise, 
i which by Eve was closed from all men, is now 
the blessed Virgin Mary. Secondly, 
star enlumineth the night by his clear- 
ness, in like wise the glorious lady enlumineth by 
her life all holy church. Whereof holy church 
singeth : Cujus vita gloriosa lucem dedit seculo ; 
the noble life of our Lady giveth light to all 
churches. For as saith Hugo de Sancto Victore: 
O glorious Lady, forasmuch as thou hast engendered 
a grace and glory to all manner of people, unto 
the dead life, to sinners grace, and to caitiffs pardon, 
may be said as is said Judith, cap. xv., Tu gloria 
Jerusalem, tu lsetitia Israel, tu honorificentia, etc. : 
Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou art the joy 
of Israel, thou art all the honour of our people. 
Cap. eodem : Confortatum est cor tuum, eo quod 
castitatem amaveris, et post virum tuum, alterum 
nescieris : ideo et manus Domini confortavit te, et 


j opened by 
/ like as the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


125 


ideo eris benedicta in aeternum : Thou hast kept The 
chastity, and therefore thou shalt be blessed Concep- 
permanably. Judith viii. Ora pro nobis, quoniam 
mulier sancta es, etc. Item cap. xiv. Benedicta 0ur y 
es, etc. It was said to Judith the widow, this 
that we may say to our Lady : Pray for us for ye 
be an holy woman, ye be a daughter that is 
blessed of the sovereign God above all the women 
that be on the earth. Thirdly, she is compared 
to the star, for she hath dwelled all her life 
stedfastly in all works of virtue, without doing any 
sin, like as the star holdeth him on the firmamenl 
without descending to the earth. For as Sy 
Bernard saith: If it were demanded to all the 
saints that ever have been : have ye been without 
sin? Except the glorious Virgin Mary, they 
might answer this that is written Johannis, cap. i. 

Si dixerimu8 quoniam non peccavimus, etc. : If 
we say that we have do no sin, we deceive our 
selves, and the truth is not in us. 

This glorious virgin was, in the womb of her 
mother sanctified more plainly and more specially 
than ever was any other, for as saith S. Thomas 
Aquinas in Compendio : There be three manners 
of sanctifications, the first is common, and given 
by the sacraments of the holy church, like as by 
baptism and other sacraments, and these give 
grace but to take away the inclination to sin 
deadly and venially, nay, and this was done in 
the Virgin Mary, for she was hallowed and con- 
firmed in all goodness, more than ever was any : 
creature, like as saith S. Austin : She did never 
sin mortal nor venial. For she was so much 
enlumined by the Holy Ghost which descended in 
her, that through the conception of her blessed son 
Jesu Christ, which rested in her nine months, she 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



126 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The was so confirmed in all virtues that there abode 
Concep- ; n her no inclination of sin. And therefore the 
our^Lad doth her more reverence and honour 

y in ordaining to hallow the feast of her conception, 
because this feast is common to the knowledge of 
holy church by some miracles, like as we find 
reading in this manner : 

Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury and pastor 
of England, sendeth greeting and benediction in 
our Lord perpetual unto the bishops that be 
under me, and to all them that have remembrance 
of the blessed Virgin Mary mother of God. 

Right dear brethren, how the conception of the 
glorious Virgin Mary hath been showed sometime 
in England, in France, and in other countries by 
miracles, I shall rehearse to you. 

In the time that it pleased to God for to correct 
the people of England of their evils and sins, and 
to constrain them to his service, he gave victory in 
battle to William, the glorious Duke of Nor- 
mandy, to win and conquer the realm of England. 
And after that he was king of the land, anon by 
the help of God, and of his prudence, he reformed 
the estates and dignities of holy church into better 
reformation than it had been. To which the 
devil, enemy unto all good works had envy, and 
pained him to empesh and let the good works, as 
well by falseness of his servants as by encumbering 
of his strangers. For when the Danes heard say 
that England was subject unto the Normans, anon 
they made them ready to withstand it. When 
king William understood this, anon he sent the 
Abbot of Rumsey, which was named Helsinus, into 
Denmark for to know the truth. This Abbot 
after that he had done well and diligently the 
charge of his commission, and that he was returned 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


127 


a great part of the sea homeward, anon arose a The 
great tempest on the sea, in such wise that the Concep- 
cords and other habiliments of the ship brake, k 0 ® of 
And the masters and governors of the ship, and all 0Ur * 
they that were therein, lost the hope and trust to 
escape the peril of this tempest, and all cried 
devoutly to the glorious Virgin Mary, which is 
comfort to the discomforted, and hope to the 
despaired, and recommended themselves in the 
keeping of God. And anon they saw coming 
tofbre the ship, upon the water, an honourable 
person in habit of a bishop, which called the said 
abbot m the ship, and said to him: Wilt thou 
escape these perils of the sea, and go home whole 
and safe into thy country ? And the abbot 
answered, weeping, that he desired that above all 
other things. Then said the angel to him : Know 
thou that 1 am sent hither by our Lady for to say to 
thee that if thou wilt hear me and do thereafter, 
thou shalt escape this peril of the sea. The abbot 
promised that gladly he would obey to that he 
should say. Then said the angel : Make covenant 
to God, and to me, that thou shalt do hallow the 
feast of the Conception of our Lady, and of her 
creation, well and solemnly, and that thou shalt go 
and. preach it. And the abbot demanded in 
what time this feast should be kept. The angel 
answered to him, The eighth day of December. 

And the abbot demanded him what office and 
service he should take for the service in holy 
church. And the angel answered : All the office 
of the nativity of our Lady, save where thou sayest 
nativity, thou shalt say, conception, and anon after 
the angel vanished away and the tempest ceased. 

And the abbot came home safely into his country 
with his company, and notified to all them that he 
VOL. u. i 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



128 


THE, GOLDEN LEGEND 


The mighty that he had heard and teem Andy right 
Concep- dear sirs, if ye will arrive at the port of health, let us 
oujMLad fallow devoutly the creation and the conception of 
^ the mother of our Lord, by whom we may receive the 
reward of her son in the glory of paradise celestial* 

It it alt© otherwise declared: In the time of 
Charlemagne, king of France, there was a clerk 
which was brother germain to the king of Hungary, 
which loved heartily the blessedVirgin Mary arid 
was wont to say every day matins of her, and the 
Hours. It happed that by counsel of his friends 
he took in marriage a much fair damsel, and when 
he had wedded her, and the priest had given the 
benediction on them after the mass, anon he 
remembered that that day he had not said his Hours 
of our Lady, wherefore he sent home the bride, his 
wife, and the people, to his house, and he abode in 
the church beside an altar for to say his Hours ; 
and when he came to this anthem : Pulchra es et 
decora filia Jerusalem ; that is to say : Thou art 
fair and gracious, daughter of Jerusalem, anon 
appeared tofore him the glorious Virgin Mary with 
two angels on either side, and said to him: l am 
fair and gracious, wherefore leavest thou me and 
takest thou another wife ? or where hast thou seen 
one more fair than lam? And the clerk answered : 
Madam, thy beauty surmounteth all the beauty of 
the world, thou art lift up above the heavens and 
above the angels ; what wilt thou that I do? And 
she answered and said : If thou wilt leave thy wife 
fleshly, thou shalt have me thine espouse in the 
realm of heaven, and if thou wilt hallow the feast 
pf my conception, the eighth day of December, 
and preach it about that it may be hallowed, thou 
shalt be crowned m the realm of heaven. And 
anon therewith our Blessed Lady vanished away. | 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN XEGEND 


129 


Let us then pray to that glorious virgin our Lady The Lives 
Saint Mary, that we after this short and transitory of Saints 
life may be crowned in heaven in glory celestial, to Gentian, 
which God bring us. Amen. 

Victorice 

The Lives of the Saints Gentian , Fulcian and 
Victorice . 

Saints Fulcian . and Victorice, of whom the 
solemnity is hallowed, came from the city of 
Rome for to preach the faith of Jesu Christ into 
these parts, and were in the city of Therouanne 
and preached there the faith. And they repaired 
by Amiens, and passed by a little village named 
Gains, and found there a good man that believed 
in God, but he was not yet baptized, and was 
named Gentian. And he saluted them and said : 

Sir 8, ye be welcome, and they said : God save 
you. And after, he demanded them : What seek 
ye? And they answered: We seek one of our 
fellows called Quintin, and he said: Ah ! fair 
sirs, he was but late beheaded not long sith, and 
sentence was given that, where such manner people 
might be found that preached of God, that they 
should be slain, but come ye near, and eat ye a 
morsel of bread. And as they were there, a 
tyrant that was called Rictius Varus came with 
servants, and said to Gentian : Deliver to us them 
that be herein, and he said: I shall not do it. 

Then he drew out his sword all naked. Gentian 
said : They take none heed of you. The tyrant 
Rictius Varus had great anger and sorrow, and 
made to take Gentian, and smote off his head. 

And after, he made to be taken S. Fulcian and 
S. Victorice, and brought them to Amiens, and 


Digitized by Google 



130 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The said to them that they should forsake their God, 
Life of whom they had made die an evil death, and they 
S. Lucy sa id they would not* Then he did do take 
broches of iron and put them through their ears and 
through their nostrils, and after did do smite off 
their heads. And, by the will and power of our 
Lord, they arose up, and took their heads in their 
hands, and bare them two miles far from the place 
where they had been beheaded. And all three 
were buried together in that town which is called 
Saint Fulcien. A great rage and madness took 
the tyrant Rictius Varus, and he cried through the 
city of Amiens, all enraged: Alas! alas! alas! 
now be well the Saints avenged on me, and sith 
died foul in his woodness. And thus were the 
friends of our Lord avenged on the tyrant, and by 
such martyrdom the glorious saints departed out of 
this life unto the realm of heaven. Then pray we 
unto the glorious martyrs S. Fulcian, S. Victorice, 
and S. Gentian, that they will pray God for us, 
that by their merits we may have pardon and for- 
giveness of our sins. Amen. 


Here followeth the Life of the Blessed Virgin Lucy . 

Lucy is said of light, and light is beauty in 
beholding, after that S. Ambrose saith : The 
nature of light is such, she is gracious in beholding, 
she spreadeth over all without lying down, she 
passeth in going right without crooking by right 
long line $ and it is without dilation of tarrying, 
and therefore it is showed the blessed Lucy hath 
beauty of virginity without any corruption ; essence 
of charity without disordinate love ; rightful going 
and devotion to God, without squaring out of the 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


131 

way ; right long line by continual work without The 
negligence of slothful tarrying. In Lucy is said, Life of 
the way of light. ^ uc y 

S. Lucy, die holy virgin, was born in Sicily, and 
extract and engendered of a noble lineage, in the 
city of Syracuse. When she heard of the good 
fame and renown of S. Agatha or Agaas, which 
was published and spread all about, anon she went 
to her sepulchre with her mother which was named 
Euthicia, which had a malady, named the bloody 
flux, by the space pf four years, the which no 
master in physic ne surgery could heal. And when 
they were at a mass, one read a gospel which 
made mention of a woman which was healed of the 
bloody flux by touching of the hem of the coat of 
Jesu Christ. When S. Lucy heard this, anon she 
said to her mother : Mother, if ye believe that this 
which is read be true, and also that S. Agatha 
hath now presently with her Jesu Christ, and also 
that for his name she suffered martyrdom, and if 
ye, with this belief, touch her sepulchre, without 
doubt ye shall be anon guerished and healed. 

Upon this they, after the mass, when the people 
were departed, they twain fell down on their knees 
on the sepulchre of S. Agatha in prayers, and 
weeping began to pray for her help and aid. S. 

Lucy in making her prayers for her mother fell 
asleep, and she saw in her sleep S. Agatha among 
the angels, nobly adorned and arrayed with precious 
stones, which said thus to her : Lucy, my sweet 
sister, devout virgin to God, wherefore prayest 
thou to me for thy mother, for such thing as thou 
mayest thyself right soon give to her ? For I tell 
thee for truth, that for thy faith, and thy good, thy 
mother is safe and whole. With these words S. 

Lucy awoke all afraid, and said to her mother : 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


* 3 * 

The Mother, ye be guerished and all whole ; I pray you 
Life of ^ 8 ake by whose prayers ye be healed, that 
S. Lucy y e neYer ma ke mention to me for to take an hus- 
band ne spouse, but all that good that ye would 
give me with a man, I pray you that ye will give 
it to me for to do alms withal that I may come to 
my saviour Jesu Christ. Her mother answered to 
her : Fair daughter, thy patrimony, which I have 
received this nine years, sith thy father died, I 
have nothing aminished, but I have multiplied and 
increased it ; but abide till I am departed out of 
this world, and then forthon do as it shall please 
thee. S. Lucy said: Sweet mother, hear my 
counsel : he is not beloved of God, that for his 
• love giveth that which he may not use himself, but 
if thou wilt find God debonair to thee, give for him 
that which thou mayest dispend, for after thy death 
thou mayest in no wise use thy goods. That 
which thou givest when thou shaft die, thou givest 
it because thou mayest not bear it udth thee. Give 
then for God’s sake whiles thou livest : and as to 
such good as thou oughtest to give to me with an 
husband or spouse, begin to give all that to your 
people for the love of Jesu Christ. Hereof spake 
alway Lucy to her mother, and every day they 
gave alms of their goods. And when they had 
almost sold their patrimony and their jewels, 
tidings came to the knowledge of her spouse that 
should have wedded her, and that she was promised 
to, the which he demanded hereof the truth of the 
nurse of S. Lucy, and wherefore they sold thus 
their patrimony. She answered cautelously, and 
said that they did it because that S. Lucy, which 
should have been his wife, had found one which 
had a more fairer and nobler heritage than his was, 
the which they would buy tofore ere they should 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


133 


assemble by marriage. The fool believed it, for he The 
understood carnally this that the nurse had said to Life °* 
him spiritually, and helped them to sell their heritage. Locy 

But when he understood that she gave all for God’s 
love, and that he felt himself deceived, anon he 
complained on Lucy, and made her to come tofore a 
judge named Paschasius, which was a miscreant and 
heathen man. And it was because she was Christian, 
and that she did against the law of the Emperor, 
Paschasius blamed her, and admonested her to 
worship and do sacrifice to the idols. She said : 

Sacrifice which pleaseth God is to visit the widows 
and orphans, and to help them in their need : I 
have not ceased these three years past to make to 
God such sacrifice, and forasmuch as I have no 
more of which I may make yet such sacrifice, I 
offer to him myself, let him do with his offering as 
it pleaseth him. Paschasius said : Thou nughtest 
say these words unto Christian people, semblable to 
thee, but to me which keep the commandments of 
the emperors, thou sayest them in vain. S. Lucy 
said : If thou wilt keep the law of thy lords, I 
shall keep the law of God ; thou doubtest to anger 
them, and I shall keep me that I anger not my 
God; thou wilt please them, and I covet only 
to please our Lord Jesu Christ. Paschasius said : 

Thou hast dispended thy patrimony with the ribalds, 
and therefore thou speakest as a ribald. She said: 

I have set my patrimony in a sure place; unto 
the corruption of my heart ne body, I never agreed 
ne suffered it. Paschasius said: Who be they 
that corrupt the heart and the body ? She said : 

Ye be that corrupt the hearts, of whom the apostle 
said: The evil words corrupt the good manners. 

Ye counsel the souls to forsake their creator and 
to ensue the devil in making sacrifice to the idols ; 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



134 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The the corrupters of the body be they that love the 
Life of short delectations corporal, and despite delights 
* u y spiritual that endure for ever. Paschasius said : 
These words that thou sayest shall finish when 
thou shalt come to thy pains. She said: The 
words of God may not end ne finish. Paschasius 
said : How then ! art thou God ? She said : I 
am the handmaid of God, and for so much asT 
say, they be the words of God, fpr he saith : Ye 
be not they that speak tofore the princes and judges, 
but the Holy Ghost speaketh in you. Paschasius 
said : And therefore die Holy Ghost is in thee ? 
She said: The apostle saith that they be the 
temple of God that live chastely, and die Holy 
Ghost dwelleth in them. Paschasius said : I shall 
do bring thee to the bordel, where thou shalt lose 
. thy chastity, and then the Holy Ghost shall depart 
from thee. She said : The body, may take no 
corruption but if the heart and will give thereto 
assenting : for if thou madest me to do sacrifice by 
my hands, by force, to the idols, against , my will* 
God, shall take it only but as a derision, .for he 
judgeth only of the will and consenting. And 
therefore, if thou make my body to be defouled 
without mine assent, and against my will, my 
chastity shall increase double to the merit of the 
crown of glory. What thing that thou dost to the 
body, which is in thy power, that beareth no 
prejudice to the handmaid of Jesu Christ. Then 
commanded Paschasius that the ribalds of the town 
should come, to whom he delivered S. Lucy, 
saying : Call other to you for to defoul her, and 
labour her so much till she be dead. Anon the 
ribalds would have drawn her from thence where 
she was, and have brought her to the bordel, but 
the Holy Ghost made her so pesant and heavy 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


135 


that in no wise might they move her from the The 
place. Wherefore many of the servants of the 
judge put hand to, for to draw with the other, and 
she abode still. Then they bound cords to her 
hands and feet, and all drew, but she abode alway 
still as a mountain, without moving. Whereof 
Paschasius was all anguishous and angry, and did 
do call his enchanters, which might never move 
her for all enchantery. Then Paschasius did do 
yoke for her oxen many, for to draw her, and yet 
they might not move her from the place. Then 
Paschasius demanded her for what reason might it 
be that a frail maid might not be drawn ne moved 
by a thousand men. She said : It is the work of 
God, and if thou aettest thereto yet ten thousand 
they should not move me. Of these words the 
judge was sore tormented. And S. Lucy said to 
him ; Wherefore tormentest thou thyself thus ? If 
thou hast proved and assayed that I am the temple 
of God, believe it. If thou hast not assayed, learn 
to assay. And hereof was the judge more tor- 
mented, for he saw that she made but her mockery 
with him. Wherefore he did do make about 
S. Lucy a right great fire, and made to be cast on 
her pitch, resin, and boiling oil, and she abode all 
still tofore the fire, and said: I have prayed to 
Jesu Christ that this fire have no domination in me 
to the end that the Christian men that believe in 
God make of thee their derision. And I have 
prayed for respite of my martyrdom for to take 
away from the Christian men the fear and dread to 
die for the faith of Jesu Christ, and to take away 
from the miscreants the avaundng of my martyrdom. 

The friends of the judge saw that he was confused 
by the words of S. Lucy, and of the drawing much 
greatly tormented, and therefore they roof a sword 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



The Life 
of S. 
Nicasius 


136 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

through her throat, and yet for all that she died 
not anon, but spake to the people, saying: I 
announce and show to you that holy church shall 
have peace, for Diocletian the emperor, which was 
enemy to holy church is this day put out of his 
seignory, and Maximian, his fellow, is this day 
dead. And in likewise as S. Agatha is patroness 
and keeper of Catania, in the same wise shall I be 
committed to be patroness of Syracuse, this city. 
And as she spake thus to the people, the sergeants 
and ministers of Rome came for to take Paschasius 
and bring him to Rome, because he was accused 
tofore the senators of Rome of that he had robbed 
the province; wherefore he received his sentence 
of the senate, and had his head smitten off. S. 
Lucy never removed from the place where she 
was hurt with the sword, ne died not till the priest 
came and brought the blessed body of our Lord 
Jesu Christ. And as soon as she had received the 
blessed sacrament she rendered and gave up her 
soul to God, thanking and praising him of all his 
goodness. In that same place is a church edified 
in the name of her, whereas many benefits have 
been given to the honour of our Lord Jesu Christ, 
which is blessed world without end. Amen. 


Here follow eth the Life of S. Nicasius • 

In that time that the Vandals wasted and 
destroyed many cities and lands, they came to the 
city of Rheims in France, in winch city S. Nicasius 
was archbishop. He preached the faith of Jesu 
Christ and comforted the people, and admonished 
them to receive in patience the persecution of the 
Vandals, which had then destroyed the country 
and land all about the city. 1 And as this people 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*37 


called Vandals approached the city, the folk came The Life 
to the archbishop and demanded counsel if they . 
should yield them or go and fight for the city. Nlca8ms 
S. Nicasius, to whom God had showed tofore that 
the Vandals came, that all the city should be 
destroyed, impetered and had grant of our Lord 
that this tribulation and this death should be to the 
health of the souls of them that to their power 
should be repentant of their sins, and sith said to 
them : Let us go surely to the peril of death, and 
let us abide the mercy of God. I am ready to set 
my soul for my people; let us pray for our 
enemies, and let us desire of their souls like as of 
our own. Thus as he spake to the people, S. 

Eutropia, his sister, exhorted as much as she might 
the people to receive martyrdom, which was ready. 

After the orisons and the enseignments that they 
had made to the people, they issued out against the 
Vandals, and S. Nicasius said tb them : If ye will 
slay my people, slay me first tofore. And after he 
preached to them the faith of Jesu Christ, and 
taught them how they might be saved ; but they 
would not understand it. Then the holy man set 
him to prayer, and while he prayed his enemies 
smote off his head. And after that the head was 
smitten off he made an end of his prayer, and said 
in his tongue this verse of the psalter: Adhesit 
pavimento, etc. When S. Eutropia saw her brother 
martyred, and saw that no man made her ready to 
be martyred, but strove for her beauty, she ran to 
him that had slain her brother, and would have 
scratched his eyes out of his head ; and anon she 
was martyred and many others with her. Then 
the Vandals saw a great company of chivalry of 
heaven come for to avenge the great felony that 
they had done, and heard a great sound in the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


138 

The Life church 5 and they had so great fear and dread that 
Th°m&s *dl their armours and fled. And there 

° the appeared a great light and clearness upon the 
Apostle bodies, that it was seen far by night. 

Then came again some burgesses of them that 
had fled, and saw the clearness, and felt a great 
odour about the martyrs, and buried them about 
the city, and thanked our Lord and served him 
more perfectly than they had done tofore. Let us 
pray then to the holy S, Nicasius and to S. 
Eutropia that they will get us grace of our Lord 
and that they bring us into their company. Amen. 

Here beginnetb the Life of S. Thomas the Apostle . 

Thomas is as much to say as abysm or double, 
which in Greek is said didimus ; or else Thomas 
is said of Thomos, which is said division or parting. 
He was abysm or swallow because he deserved to 
pierce the deepness of divinity, when at his inter- 
rogation Jesu Christ answered to him ; Ego sum 
via, Veritas et vita: I am the way, truth, and 
life. He is said double because he knew Christ 
in his resurrection in double wise more than 
other knew, for they knew him but only in seeing, 
but Thomas knew him both seeing and feeling. 
He is said division or departing, for he departed 
his love from the love of the world, and was 
departed from the other apostles at the resurrection. 
Or Thomas is said as, appeared again, that is in 
the love of God by contemplation. He had there 
things in him of which Prosper saith in die book 
of the Soul Contemplative, and demandeth what it 
is for to love nothing but to conceive the binning 
of him in his thought, and the talent of God, and 
the hate of sin, and to forsake die world. Or 


Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


139 


Thomas is as much to say as alway going in the 
love and contemplation of God. Or Thomas is as 
much as: My God, because he said, when he 
touched the side of our Lord : My God and my 
Lord. 

S. Thomas, when he was in Caesarea, our Lord 
appeared to him, and said : The King of India, 
Gundoferus, hath sent his provost, Abbanes, for 
to seek men. that can well the craft of masons, 
and I shall send thee to him. And S. Thomas 
said : Sir, send me over all save to them of India. 
And our Lord said to him : Go thy way thither 
surely, for I shall be thy keeper, and when thou 
hast converted them of India, thou shalt come to 
me by the crown of martyrdom.. And Thomas 
said to him: Thou art my lord, and I thy servant; 
thy will be fulfilled. And as the provost went 
through the market, our Lord said to him: Young 
man, what wilt thou buy ? and he said : My lord 
hath sent me for to bring to him some that be 
learned in the science of masonry, that they might 
make for him a palace after the work of Rome. 
And then our Lord delivered to him S. Thomas 
the Apostle, and told to him that he was much 
expert in that work. And they departed and 
sailed till they came in a city, where the king 
made a wedding of his daughter, and had do cry 
that all the people should come to this feast of this 
marriage or else he would be angry. And it so 
happed that the provost and Thomas went thither, 
and an Hebrew maid had a pipe in her hand and 
praised ever each' one with some laud or praising. 
And when she saw the apostle she knew that he 
was an Hebrew because he ate not, but had alway 
his eyes firm toward heaven. And as the maid 
sang tofore him in Hebrew, she said : The God 


The Life 
of S. 
Thomas 
the 

Apostle 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



140 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life of heaven is one only God, the which created all 
°f S. things and founded the seas. And the apostle 
made her to say these words again. And the 
Apostle butler beheld him, and saw that Thomas ate not ne 
drank not, but alway looked upward to heaven. 
And he came to the aposde and smote, him on the 
cheek ; and the apostle said to him, that in time to 
come it be pardoned to thee, and that now a wound 
transitory be given to thee, and said: I shall not 
arise from this place till the hand that hath smitten 
me be eaten with dogs. And anon after, the 
butler went for to fetch water at a well, and there 
a lion came and slew him and drank his blood, 
and the hounds drew his body into pieces, in such 
wise that a black dog brought the right arm into 
the hall in the middle of the dinner. And when 
they saw this, all the company was abashed, and 
the maid remembered the words, and threw down 
her pipe or flute, and fell down at the feet of the 
apostle. And this vengeance blameth S. Austin 
in his book of Faustius, and saith that this was set 
in of some false prophets, for this thing might be 
suspicious unto many things. Whether it be true 
or no it appertained^ not to me, but I wot well 
that they should be like as our Lord teacheth, 
which saith : If any man smiteth thee on that one 
cheek, show and offer to him that other, and 
certainly the apostle held within his courage the 
will of God and of dilection, and without forth he 
required example of correction. This saith S. 
Austin. And then, at the request of the. king, the 
apostle blessed them that were new married, and 
said : Lord God give to these children the blessing 
of thy right hand, and set in their minds the seed 
of life. And when the apostle was gone, there 
was found, in the hand of the young man that was 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


141 


married, a branch of palm lull of dates ; and when The Life 
he and his wife had eaten of the fruit they fell 
asleep, and they had one semblable dream. For Thomas 
them seemed that a king adorned with precious Apostle 
stones embraced them, and said : Mine apostle 
hath blessed you in such wise that ye shall be 
partakers of the glory perdurable. Then they 
awoke, and told to each other their dream. And 
then the apostle came to them and said : My king 
hath appeared right now to you, and hath brought 
me hither, the doors being shut, so that my 
blessing may be fruitful upon you, and that ye may 
have the sureness of your flesh, the which is queen 
of all virtues and fruit of perpetual health, and 
above the angels’ possessions of all good, victory 
of lechery, lord of the faith, discomfiture of devils, 
and surety of joys perdurable. Lechery is engen- 
dered of corruption, and of corruption cometh 
pollution, and of pollution cometh sin, and of sin is 
confusion engendered. 

And he thus saying, two angels appeared to 
them and said : We be the two angels deputed for 
to keep you, and if ye keep well all the admonest- 
ments of the apostle we shall offer to God all your 
desires. And then the apostle baptized them, and 
informed them diligently in the faith. And long 
time after the wife, named Pelagia, was sacred 
with a veil, and suffered martyrdom, and the 
husband named Denis was sacred bishop of that 
city. And after this, the apostle and Abbanes 
came unto'the King of India, and the king devised 
to the apostle a marvellous palace, and delivered 
to him great treasure. And the king went into 
another province, and the apostle gave all the 
treasure to poor people, and the apostle was alway 
in predications two years or thereabout ere the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



142 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life king came, and concerted much people without 
of S. number to the faith. And when the king came 
and knew what he had done, he put him and 
Ap os tle Abbanes in the most deepest of his prisons, and 
purposed fully to slay them and burn. And in 
the meanwhile Gad, brother of the king, died, and 
there was made for him a rich sepulchre, and the 
fourth day he that had been dead arose from death 
to life, and all men were abashed and fled. And 
he said to his brother : This man that thou in- 
tendest to slay and bum is the friend of God, and 
the angels of God serve him, and they brought me 
in to paradise, and have showed me a palace of 
gold and silver and of precious stones, and it is 
marvellously ordained. And when I marvelled 
of the great beauty thereof, they said to me : This 
is the palace that Thomas hath made for thy 
brother. And when I said that I would be 
thereof porter, they said to me : Thy brother is 
made unworthy to have it; if thou wik dwell 
therein, we shall pray God to raise thee so that 
thou mayst go buy it of thy brother, in giving to 
him the money that he supposed he had lost. 
And when he had said this he ran to the prison 
and required of the apostle that he would pardon 
his brother that he had done to him, and then 
delivered him out of prison, and prayed the apostle 
that he would take and do on him a precious vesture. 
And the apostle said to him : Knowest thou not 
that they which ween to have power in things 
celestial set nought in nothing fleshly ne earthly? 
And when the apostle issued out of prison, the 
king came against him and fell down at his feet, 
and required of him pardon. Then the apostle 
said to him : God hath given to you much great 
grace when he hath showed to you his secrets; 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


143 


now believe in Jesu Christ and be ye baptized, to The Life 
the end that thou be prince in the realm perdurable, of S. 
And then the brother of the king said : I have Thomas 
seen the palace that thou hast do make to my Apostle 
brother, and I am come for to buy it. And the 
apostle said to him : If it be the will of thy 
brother it shall be done. And the king said : 

Sith it pleaseth God, this shall be mine, and the 
apostle shall make to thee another ; and if per- 
adventure he may not, this same shall be common 
to thee and to me. And the apostle answered and 
said: Many palaces be there in heaven which be 
made ready sith the beginning of the world, that be 
bought by price of the faith and by alms of your 
riches, which may well go tofore you to these 
palaces, but they may not follow you. 

And after this, at the end of a month, the 
apostle made to assemble all them of the province, 
and when they were assembled he commanded that 
the feeble and sick should be set apart by them- 
selves. Then he prayed for them, and they that 
were well enseigned and taught said Amen. And 
forthwith came a clear light from heaven which 
descended upon them, and smote down all the 
people and the apostle to the earth ; and they 
supposed they had been smitten with thunder, and 
so lay by the space of half an hour. After, the 
apostle rose and said : Arise ye up for my lord is 
come as thunder, and hath healed us; and anon 
they arose all whole and glorified God and the 
apostle. Then began the apostle to teach them, 
and to show to them the degrees of virtue. The 
first is that they should believe in God which is 
one essence, and treble or three in persons, and 
showed to them examples sensible, how three 
persons, be in one essence. The first example in 

VOL. II. It 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



144 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life a man is wisdom, and thereof cometh understand- 
of S. Jng, memory, and cunning. Cunning is of that 
# *'* MM the t ^ ou hast learned the memory or mind, and 
Apostle retainest that thou shouldest forget. And the 
understanding is that thou understandest this that 
is taught to thee and showed. The second 
example is that, in a vine be three things, the 
stock, the leaf, and the fruit. The third example 
is that three things be in the head of a man, hear- 
ing, seeing, and tasting or smelling. The second 
degree that they receive baptism. The third, 
that they keep them from fornication. The 
fourth, that they keep them from avarice. The 
fifth, that they restrain them from gluttony. The 
sixth, that they keep their penance. The seventh, 
that they persevere and abide in these things. The 
eighth, that they love hospitality. The ninth, that 
in things to be done they require the will of God, 
and that they require such things by works. The 
tenth, that they eschew those things that be not for 
to be done. The eleventh, that they do charity 
to their enemies and to their friends. The twelfth, 
that they keep charity, and do work by diligence 
to keep these things. And after his predication, 
forty thousand men were baptized, without women 
and small children. 


And incontinent he went into the great India 
where he shone by miracles innumerable, for he 
enlumined and made to see Syntice, the friend of 
Migdonia, which was wife of Carisius, cousin of 
the king of India. And Migdonia said to 
Syntice: Weenest thou that I may see him? 
Then Migdonia changed her habit by the counsel 
of Syntice, and put herself among the poor women, 
and came whereas the apostle preached. And he 
begin to preach of the maleurte and unhappiness 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


i45 


of this life, and said that this life is unhappy, 
wretched and subject to adventures, and is so 
slippery and fleeting, that when one weeneth to 
hold it, it fleeth away. And after, he began to 
show to them by four reasons that they should 
gladly hear the word of God, and likeneth it to 
four manner of things : first, unto a colour which 
lighteth the eye of our understanding ; secondly, 
to a syrup or a purgation, for the word of God 
purgeth our affection from all fleshly love 5 thirdly, 
unto an emplaister, because it healeth the wounds 
of our sins ; and fourthly, unto meat, because the 
word of God nourisheth us, and delighteth in 
heavenly love. And in like manner, like as all 
these things avail not to the sick man but if he 
take and receive them, in like wise, the word of 
God profiteth nothing to a languishing sick man, 
if he hear it not devoutly. And as the apostle 
thus preached, Migdonia believed in God, and 
refused the bed of her husband. Then Carisius 
did so much that he made the apostle to be set 
in prison. And Migdonia went to him and asked 
him forgiveness, because he was set in prison for 
her sake. And he comforted her sweetly, and 
said he would suffer it debonairly. And then 
Carisius prayed the king that he would send the 
queen his wife’s sister unto her, for to essay if 
she might turn her, and call her again from the 
Christian faith. And the queen was sent thither, 
and when she saw her, and knew of so many 
miracles as the apostle did, she said : They be 
accursed of God that believe not in his works. 
Then the apostle taught them shortly that were 
there, four things ; first, that they should love the 
church, honour and worship the priests, assemble 
them often in prayers, and often to hear the word 


The Life 
of S. 
Thomas 
the 

Apostle 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



1 46 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life of God. And when the king saw the queen, he 
of S. g a id to her : Why hast thou abided there so long ? 

1 homos gjjg then answered : I had supposed that 

Apostle Migdonia had been a fool, but she is right wise, 
for she hath brought me to the apostle, which hath 
made me to know the way of truth, and they be 
overmuch fools that believe not the way of truth, 
that is to say, that they believe in Jesu Christ. 
And never after would the queen lie with the 
king. And then the king was abashed, and said 
to his cousin : When I would have recovered thy 
wife I have lost mine, and my wife is worse to me 
than thine is to thee. Then the king commanded 
that the apostle should be brought tofore him, his 
hands and feet bound; and was commanded that 
he should reconcile the wives to their husbands. 
And then the apostle said to the king, in showing 
to him by three examples that, as long as he 
should be in the error of the faith they ought not 
to obey them. That is to wit, by the example of the 
king, by example of the tower, and by example of 
the fountain, and said to him : Thou that art king 
wilt have no services soiled ne foul, but thou hast 
cleanly servants and neat chamberers. And what 
weenest thou God loveth? Chastity and clean 
services. Am I then to blame if I preach to 
thee to love God and his servants whom he 
loveth ? I have made them clean servants to him ; 
I have founded a tower ; and thou sayst to me 
that I should destroy it. Also I have dolven in 
the deep earth, and have brought forth a fountain 
out of the abysm, and thou sayst I should stop it. 
Then the king was angry, and commanded to bring 
forth pieces of iron burning, and made to set the 
apostle on them all naked, his feet bound. And 
anon by the will of our Lord, a fountain of water 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


147 


eourded and sprang up, and quenched it all. And The Life 
then the king, by the counsel of his cousin, made 
him to be set in a burning furnace, which was ^ omas 
made so cold that the next day he issued out all Apostle 
safe, without harm. And then said Carisius to 
the king : Make him to offer sacrifice to one of 
the gods only, in such wise that he fall in the ire 
of his God that thus delivereth him. And as 
they constrained him thereto, he said : King, thou 
art nothing more noble, ne more mighty than be 
thy painters, and how despisest thou very God and 
worshippest a painting whom thou weenest to be thy 
God? Like as Carisius hath said to thee, that 
my God should be angry when that I worshipped 
thy god. And if he be angered, it should be 
more to thy god than to me, for when thou 
shouldest ween that I worshipped thy God, I 
should worship mine. And the king said : Why 
speakest thou to me such words ? And then the 
apostle commanded in Hebrew the devil that was 
within the idol that, as soon as he kneeled tofore 
the idol, he should anon break it in pieces. And 
the apostle kneeled and said : Lo ! see ye that I 
worship, but not the idol ; I adore, but not the 
metal ; I worship, but not the false image, but I 
honour and worship my Lord Jesu Christ in the 
name of whom I command thee, devil, which art 
hid within this image, that thou break this false 
idol. And anon he molt it as wax. And then the 
priests came lowing as beasts, and the bishop of the 
temple lift up a glaive and run the apostle through 
and said : I shall avenge the injury of my god. 

And the king and Carisius fled away, for they saw 
that the people would avenge the apostle and burn 
the bishop all quick. And the Christian men bare 
away the body of the apostle and buried it worship- 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



The Life 
of S. 
Thomas 
the 
Apostle 


148 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

fully. Long time after, about the year of our 
Lord two hundred and thirty, the body of the 
apostle was borne into Edessa, the city which 
sometime was said Rages, city of Media; and 
Alexander the Emperor bare it thither at the 
request of the Syrians. And in this city no man 
might harbour Jew, ne paynim, ne tyrant, that 
should live. After this Abagar, king of this city, 
desired to have an epistle written with the hand 
of our Lord, for if any men moved war against 
this city, they took a Christian child, and set him 
on the gate, and he should there read the epistle, 
and the same day, what for the virtue of the 
writing of our Saviour, as for the merits of the 
apostle, the enemies fled or else made peace. 

Isidore, in the book of the Life of the Saints, 
saith thus of this apostle: Thomas, apostle and 
disciple of our Lord Jesu Christ, and like unto 
our Saviour, preached the Gospel unto miscreants, 
to them of Persia and of Media, to the Hircanians 
and Bactrians, and he entering into the parts of 
the orient, pierced through the entrails of the 
people. There demened his predication unto the 
title of his passion, and there was he pierced with 
a glaive and so died. And Chrysostom saith that 
when Thomas came in to the parts of the three 
kings which came to worship our Lord he baptized 
them, and they were made helpers and aiders of 
our Lord and of Christian faith. Pray we then 
to this holy apostle, S. Thomas, that he will be 
moyen unto our Lord that we may have grace of 
him to amend us in this present life, that we may 
come into his everlasting bliss. Amen. 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


149 


Here fottoweth the Life of S . Anastasia. 

S. Anastasia was daughter to a gentleman of the 
Romans, but he was a paynim. Her mother, 
which was Christian, was taught and informed in 
the faith by S. Chrysogony. The foresaid S. 
Anastasia was married unto a paynim named 
Publius, but she feigned her always to be sick, 
in such wise that she came not in his company. 
She went visiting the Christian prisoners that were 
in diverse prisons, in poverty and foul clothing, and 
she administered to them such things as they 
needed, of her good. And therefore, her husband 
made her to be straitly kept, in such wise that 
she had nothing to eat, and so would slay her, 
and all because he would with her goods make his 
pride and jollities. Then the lady, that well 
supposed to have died, sent often letters to S. 
Chrysogony, and the holy saint recomforted her 
by his letters as well as he might. Now it happed 
in the mean while that her husband died 5 then she 
was delivered from prison. She had three damsels 
which were sisters that served her, whom she had 
informed and taught that they should not reny their 
faith, ne their good life, for any menaces ne 
threatenings that the provost should do. The 
provost on a day came to draw them to him, and 
S. Anastasia did do hide them in her kitchen. 
The provost went after for to accomplish his 
ribaldry, and they kneeled down and prayed their 
prayers in such wise that the provost lost his wits. 
And when he supposed to have taken, embraced 
and held them, he embraced pots, pans, and the 
cauldrons, and kissed them in such wise that he was 
so foul, horrible and black, that when he issued 
out, his meiny that awaited his coming, supposed 


Digitized by 


Google 


The 
Life of 
S. Ana- 
stasia 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


150 

The that he had been out of his wits ; and they beat 
Life of him well, and after fled from him from fear, and 
S-A na - j e £ there alone. And he went for to com- 
plain him unto the emperor. And when he came 
to the gate, the sergeants that saw him so black 
and smutted, beat him well with rods and scratched 
him in the visage and held him for wood. And 
the caitiff knew not that he was so foul and black, 
and therefore he marvelled much more why they 
did to him so much shame where tofore they did 
to him so much honour. And he had supposed that 
he had been clad in a white robe. When they 
told him how he was arrayed, then he supposed the 
maidens had enchanted him, and sent for them, and 
would have despoiled them all naked tofore him, 
because he might see and behold them and ease 
him of his lechery, but their clothes were anon so 
fast glued to their bodies, that in no wise they might 
be taken off ne despoiled. And then he fell asleep 
and routed so fast that no man might awake him. 
At the last these three virgins were martyred and 
suffered death, and S. Anastasia was given unto 
another man, a provost, upon this condition, that if 
he might make her sacrifice unto the idols he should 
have her to his wife. And when she was brought 
into his chamber, and he would have embraced her, 
he became blind, and sith made his pilgrimage to 
his gods to know if he might be healed thereof, and 
they said to him : Because that thou hast angered 
S. Anastasia, thou art given to torments and shalt 
be alway with us. And when he returned and 
was come home unto his house, he died suddenly 
among the hands of the sergeants. Then the 
emperor delivered S. Anastasia to another provost. 
He came to the saint and said to her : I wot well 
that thou art Christian, and if thou wilt do as thy 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 151 

God saith I shall let thee go and do what thou wilt, 
for thy God saith : But if one renounce all that he 
hath, he may not be my disciple 5 then renounce 
and give to me all that thou hast, and go thy way. 
S. Anastasia answered : Jesu Christ saith that we 
should give unto the poor and not to the rich, 
then if I gave to thee, I should do against the 
commandment of God. Then the provost did do 
set her in prison, and defended that any man should 
give to her any meat. Then God sent to her 
substance of meat from heaven two months during. 
After that she was sent in exile with two hundred 
virgins in to an isle whereas many Christians were 
exiled. After that it was not long time that the 
provost remanded and sent again for S. Anastasia, 
and did do burn her the year of the incarnation of 
our Lord two hundred and four score, and made 
the others to die by divers torments ; among 
whom there was one from whom was taken much 
good, and alway she said : At the last ye may not 
take from me Jesu Christ. Apollonia, which was 
a Christian woman, toke the body of S. Anastasia, 
and buried it in her garden, and there did do make 
a fair church. Let us pray then unto Almighty 
God, that by the prayers and merits of S. Ana- 
stasia we may come unto his everlasting bliss. 
Amen. 


Here leginneth the Life of S. Eugenia . 

Eugenia, the noble virgin, which was daughter 
to Philip, duke of Alexandria, which for the 
emperor of Rome governed all the land of Egypt. 
Eugenia issued privily out of her father’s palace 
with two servants, and she went into an abbey in 


Digitized by 


Google 


The Life 
of S. 
Eugene 



152 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life the habit and array of a man, in which abbey she 
S. Jed go holy a life that at the last she was made 
Stephen a hh 0 t of the same. It happed so that no man 
knew that she was a woman, yet there was a lady 
accused her of adultery tofore the judge which was 
her own father. Eugenia was put in prison for to 
be judged to death. At the last, she said to her 
father much thing for to draw him to the faith of 
Jesu Christ. She rent her coat and showed to 
him that she was a woman and daughter of him 
that held her in prison, and so she converted her 
father unto the Christian faith. And he was after 
an holy bishop, and at the hour that he sang his 
mass he was beheaded for the faith of Jesu Christ ; 
and the lady that had falsely accused Eugenia was 
burnt with fire of hell with all her party. And 
after that, Claudia and her children came to Rome, 
and much people were by them converted, and 
many virgins by Eugenia, which Eugenia was 
much tormented in divers manners, and at the last 
by the sword accomplished her martyrdom, and 
thus made the offering of her proper body to our 
Lord Jesu Christ, qui eat benedictus in secula 
seculorum. Amen. 


Here followeth the Life of S, Stephen Protomartyr • 

Stephen is as much to say in Greek as crowned, 
and in Hebrew example to other for to suffer. Or 
Stephen is as much to 1 say as nobly and truly 
speaking, teaching and governing, or as a friend 
of the widow women ; and he was deputed of the 
apostles to keep the widows. Then he was 
crowned, for he began first to be a martyr, 
example for the ensample of his patience and 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


153 


good life, nobly speaking for right noble predica- 
tion, and well governing for the good enseign- 
ments and teaching of widows. 

S. Stephen was one of the seven deacons in the 
ministry of the apostles. For when the number 
grew of people converted, some began to murmur 
against the Jews that were converted because that 
the widows and wives of them were refused to 
serve or because they were more grieved every day 
than the other in service. For the apostles did 
this because they should be more ready to preach 
the word of God. When the apostles saw their 
great murmur, they assembled them all together, 
and said : It is not right that we leave the word of 
God for to administer and serve at the tables, and 
the gloss saith that the feeding of the soul is better 
than the meat of the body. And consider ye fair 
brethren, men of good renown among you, that be 
replenished of the Holy Ghost and of wisdom, 
what we shall establish upon this work so that they 
administer and serve, and we shall be in prayer and 
preaching. And this word pleased to them all, 
and they chose seven men, of whom the blessed 
Stephen was the first and the master, and sith he 
brought them to the apostles, and they set their 
hands upon them, and ordained them. And 
Stephen, full of grace and strength made great 
demonstrances and great signs to the people. 
Then the Jews took him and would surmount him 
in disputing, and assailed him for to overcome 
him in three manners, that was by bringing 
witnesses, by disputations, and by torments. And 
in every each one of them was aid and help given 
to him from heaven. In the first, the Holy 
Ghost administered his words, in the second, the 
angelic face that feared the false witnesses. In 


The Life 
of S. 
Stephen 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*54 

The Life the third, he saw* Jesu Christ ready to help him, 
of S. which comforted him to his martyrdom. In every 

Stephen b att ] e h e had three things ; the assault in battle, the 
aid given, and the victory. And in advising and 
beholding shortly the history, we may well see all 
these things. As the blessed Stephen did many 
things, and preached oft to the people, the Jews 
made the first battle to him for to overcome him 
by disputations. And some arose of the synagogue 
called libertines, of a religion so named of them 
that were the sons of them that had been in 
bondage and were made free, and thus they that 
first repugned against the faith were of a bond 
and thrall lineage, and also they of Cyrenia and 
Alexandria, and of them that were of Cilicia 
and Asia, all these disputed with Stephen. This 
was the first battle, and then he putteth the victory 
after, and they might not resist his wisdom, for the 
Holy Ghost spake in him : and when they saw 
that by this manner they might not overcome him 
they returned maliciously. And at the second 
time because they might overcome by false wit- 
nesses, they brought two false witnesses for to 
accuse him of four blames, and brought him to the 
judgment. And then the false men accused him 
of four things, that was of blaspheming of God in 
the law of Moses, in the tabernacle, and in the 
temple, and this was the second battle. And then 
all they that were in judgment saw the face of S. 
Stephen like as the face of an angel : and this was 
by the help of God, and this was the victory of the 
second battle. For when the false witnesses had 
all said, the prince of the priests said to him: 
What sayst thou ? Then Stephen excused him by 
order of all that which the false witnesses had 
said. And first of the blaspheming of God, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


155 


saying : God that spake to our fathers and The Life 
prophets, that is God of glory, and praised him S. 
in three things after this word glory, which is stc P hen 
expounded right sweetly. The God of glory is 
given of glory, as it is said in the book of Kings: 
Whosoever shall see my name, I shall glorify him. 

The God of glory may be said, containing glory, 
as is said in the Proverbs, the eighth chapter : 

Riches and glory be with me, the God of glory, 
to whom glory is due. And thus praised he God 
in three manners; in that he is glorious, glorifying, 
and to be glorified. And after he excused him of 
the blame in Moses, in praising him much, and 
especially in three things* that is to wit : of fervour 
of love, for he slew the Egyptian that smote the 
Hebrew, and of the miracles that he did in Egypt 
or desert, and of the familiarity of God, when he 
spake to him many times amiably. And after this 
he excused him of the third blame that was in the 
law, in praising the law in three manners ; first 
because of the giver, that was God; the second 
of the minister, which was Moses, that was a great 
prophet ; and the third because of the end, for it 
giveth life perdurable. And after, he purged him 
of the blame of the tabernacle, and of the temple, 
in praising the tabernacle in four manners, one was 
because he was commanded of God to make it, 
and was showed in vision it was accomplished by 
Moses, and that the ark of witness was therein, 
and he said that the temple succeeded tabernacle. 

And the blessed Stephen purged him of that which 
was laid to him; of which the Jews saw they might 
not overcome him in that manner. And then 
they took the third battle against him, that they 
should surmount him by torments. And when the 
blessed S. Stephen saw this, he would keep the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



156 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life commandment of our Lord, and enforced him to 
Stenhen re ® ra “ 1 t ^ iem In three manners 5 that was by shame, 
^ by dread, and by love. First by shame in blaming 
the hardness of their hearts, and said to them : Ye 
contrary alway the Holy Ghost by your hard heads, 
and hearts not piteous. Like as your fathers that 
persecuted the prophets, and slew them that showed 
the coming of God. And the gloss saith that in 
three manners they were malicious. The first, 
that they contraried the Holy Ghost. The 
second, that they persecuted the prophets, the 
third, that by their evil malice they slew Jesu 
Christ, but because they were like the common 
woman, they could have no shame to leaven their 
malice. But when they had heard these things 
they withsaid it in their hearts and grinded their 
teeth against him. After this he corrected them 
by dread, because that he said that he saw Jesu 
Christ on the right side of God, like as ready to 
help him, and condemn his adversaries, for S. 
Stephen, which was full of the Holy Ghost, 
looked up and beheld the heaven, and 6aw the 
glory of God, and said: Lol I see the heavens 
open, and the son of the maid standing on the 
right side of the virtue of God. And how be 
it that he corrected them by shame and by 
dread, yet they left not their malice, but were 
more worse than tofore, and stopped their ears 
to the end that they would not hear him, whereof 
he blamed them. And they cried with an high 
voice, and made a great assault against him, and 
cast him out of the city altogether, and stoned 
him. And they supposed to have done after their 
law as a blasphemer, in commanding that he should 
be stoned out of the castles. And these two false 
witnesses, which after their law ought to cast the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


, *57 


first stone, took off their clothes because that they The Life 
should not be touched of God, and to the end of S. 
that they might better and lighdier bewield them Stephen 
to stone him, and they left them at the feet of a 
child that then was called Saul, and after he was 
called Paul, and thus he kept the clothes of them that 
stoned him, and he was stoned of them all. And 
when he might not withdraw them from their malice, 
ne by shame ne by dread, he took the third manner, 
so that he would withdraw them by love; and 
the love that he showed them was not little, when 
he prayed for him and for them that his passion 
might not be deferred, and that the sin should not 
be imputed to them that stoned him, and saying : 

Lord Jesu Christ receive my spirit. And when 
he was on his knees he cried with an high voice 
and said: Lord, establish not to them this sin. 

And this was a marvellous love, when he prayed 
on his knees for them that stoned him, like as if 
he had prayed more for them than for himself, for 
he desired to be more empeshed for them than for 
himself, and as the gloss saith : He kneeled for 
because he ought the more humbly to pray for them 
of whom the iniquity was great ; and in this he did 
as did Jesu Christ, for in his passion he prayed for 
himself, and said: Father, I commend my spirit 
into thine hands ; and he said for them that stoned 
him: Father, forgive it them. And when S. 

Stephen had so said, he slept in our lord and was 
not dead, for he suffered sacrifice of dilection, and 
after slept in hope of resurrection. And the 
stoning of S. Stephen was made in the same year 
that our Lord ascended up into heaven, in the next 
month of August, the third day entering. And 
S. Gamaliel, and Nicodemus, which were among 
the councils of the Jews for the Christian men, 


Digitized by VjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


158 

The Life buried him in the field of Gamaliel, and made 
°f S. great weeping for him : and then was great perse- 

^tep en cut j on 0 f c hristian men that were in Jerusalem. F or 
when the blessed S. Stephen, which was one of the 
princes, was slain, they began to persecute all the 
Christian men, insomuch that the apostles, which 
were stronger than other in the faith, departed out 
of all the province of the Jews, after that which 
our Lord had commanded to them : If they 
persecute you in one oity, dee you into another. 
And the blessed doctor S. Austin rehearseth that 
the blessed S. Stephen was noblished by many 
miracles; for he raised by his merits six dead 
bodies, and healed many that were sick of divers 
maladies and languors. And without this re- 
counteth he other miracles, worthy and digne to be 
remembered ; for as he saith in the twenty-second 
book of The City of God ; the flowers that were 
put on the altar of S. Stephen were put on the 
sick men, and anon they were cured and healed; 
and the clothes taken from the altar and laid on 
them that were sick, were a medicine to many. 

For as it is said in the eighth chapter of the 
same book, these flowers taken upon the altar of 
S. Stephen were laid on the eyes of a woman that 
was blind, and anon she had again her sight. 
And also said he in the same book that a man that 
was master of a city, and was named Marcial, and 
was a paynim and would not be converted; and 
it happed that he was strongly sick, and his 
son in law that was a right good man, came into 
the church of S. Stephen, and took the flowers, 
and laid them under the head of his lord ; and anon, 
when he had slept thereupon, on the morning he 
cried that the bishop should be brought to him, 
and the bishop Was not in the town, but the priest 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*59 


came to him and bade him to believe in God, and The Life 
baptized him ; and ever as long as he lived after he 
had alway in his mouth : Jesu Christ receive my ®**P“ en 
spirit. And yet he wist not that those words 
were the words that S. Stephen last spake. And 
also he rehearseth another miracle in the same 
place, that a lady called Petronia had been sick 
much grievously, and had sought many remedies 
for to be healed of her malady, but she felt no heal. 

But in the end she had counsel of a Jew, which 
gave to her a ring with a stone, and that she should 
bind this ring with a lace to her bare flesh, and by 
the virtue of that stone she should be whole. And 
when she saw that this helped her not, she went to 
the church of the protomartyr, and prayed the 
blessed S. Stephen for her health, and anon, with- 
out breaking of die lace or of the ring, the ring 
fell down to the ground, and she felt herself anon 
all whole. 

Item, the same recounteth another miracle, not 
less marvellous : that in Caesarea of Cappadocia, 
was a lady much noble, of whom the husband was 
dead, but she had ten children, seven sons and three 
daughters. And on a time, when they had angered 
their mother, she cursed them, and the divine venge- 
ance ensued suddenly the malediction of the mother, 
so that all the children were smitten with one sem- 
blable and horrible sickness on all their members, 
for which thing they might not dwell in the country 
for shame and for the sorrow that they had, and 
began to go follily through the world. And in what- 
soever country they went, ever each man beheld 
them. And it happed that two of them, that is to 
wit a brother and a sister came to Hippo, and the 
brother was named Paul, and the sister Palladia. 

And there they found Austin the bishop and told 

VOL. 11. L 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



i6o 


TEE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Lift to him and recounted what was happed. Then 
of S. they haunted the church of S. Stephen by the 
Stepae& gp^g 0 f fifteen days, and it was tofore Easter, and 
they prayed strongly the saint for their health. 
And on E aster-day when the people was present 
Paul entered suddenly within the chancel and put 
him to prayer by great devotion, and with great 
reverence tofore the altar, and as they that were 
there abode upon the end of the thing, he arose up 
apparently all whole of his trembling. Then S. 
Austin took him and showed him to the people, 
and said that on the morn he would tell them the 
case. And as he spake to the people the sister 
was there trembling on all her members, and she 
arose up and entered into the chancel of S. Stephen, 
and anon she slept, and after arose suddenly all 
whole, and was showed to the people as was done 
tofore of her brother, and then graces and thankings 
were given to S. Stephen for the health of them both. 

When Orosius came from Jerusalem he brought 
to S. Austin of the relics of S. Stephen of whom 
many miracles were showed and done. It is to 
wit that the blessed S. Stephen suffered not death 
on the day of his feast, but it was on the day that 
his Invention is on, in the month of August. And 
if it be demanded why the feast is changed, it shall 
be said when his Invention shall be said. And 
this may suffice you for this present, for the church 
will also ordain the feasts which follow the 
nativity of Jesu Christ, for two causes. The first 
is to Jesu Christ which is head and spouse, to 
the end that the accompanies be joined to him, 
for Jesu Christ spouse of the church in this world 
adjoineth to him three companies, of which com* 
panics is said in the Canticles : My white soul and 
ruddy, chosen of thousands. The white is as to 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 161 

S. John the Evangelist, a precious confessor, and The 
the ruddy or red is as to S. Stephen the first Life of 
martyr, and chosen of thousands, is to the virginal S ‘ - 
company of the innocents. The second reason is 
that the church assembleth also together, the 
manners of the martyrs, the same by will , and by 
work, the second by will and not by deed, the 
third by deed and not by will. The first was the 
blessed Stephen, the second was in S. John the 
Evangelist, the third was in saints and glorious 
innocents which for God suffered passion. 


And next followeth of S, John the Evangelist • 

John is expounded the grace of God, or he in 
whom grace is, or to whom it is given of our 
Lord, and therefore been understood four privi- 
leges that be in the blessed S. John. The first 
was the noble love of Jesu Christ, for he loved him 
more than the other and showed to him of greater 
love, and therefore he is said the grace of God, 
also as gracious God. And to him he was more 
gracious than to Peter, for he loved him much, 
but he is love of courage and of sign, and this that 
is of signs is double. That one is for to show 
familiarity and that other is in giving benefices. 
As to the first he loved that one and the other 
equally, as to the second he loved more John, and 
as to the third, he loved more Peter. The second 
was virginity when he was chosen virgin of God, 
and therefore it is said in what is that grace, for 
grace of virginity is in a virgin, and when he would 
marry he was called of God, The third is the 
revelation of the secrets of our Lord, therefore it 
is said to whom grace is given, for to him was 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



i6a 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The given to know many secrets and profound, as of 
Life of the divinity of the Son of God, and of the end of 
S. John t h e wor ld. The fourth is the recommendation 
of the mother of God, which gift of grace was 
given of our Lord, for this gift was given to him 
when the mother was given to him into keeping. 
And Miletus, Bishop of Liege, wrote his life, the 
which Isidore abridged and set it in the book 
of nativities of the life and the death of holy 
fathers. 

S. John the apostle and evangelist was son of 
Zebedee, which had married the third sister of our 
Lady to wife, and that was brother to S. James of 
Galicia. This said John signifieth as much as the 
grace of God, and well might he have such a 
name, for he had of our Lord four graces above 
the other apostles. The first is that he was 
beloved of our Lord. The second was, that our 
Lord kept to him his virginity like as S. Jerome 
saith, for he was at his wedding, and he abode a 
clean virgin. The third is that our Lord made 
him to have much great revelation and knowledge 
of his divinity, and of the finishing of the world, 
like as it appeareth in the beginnings of his evangel, 
and in the Apocalypse. The fourth grace is that 
our Lord committed to him in especial the keeping 
of his sweet mother. He was, after the ascension 
of our Lord, in Jerusalem with the apostles and 
others, and after that they were, by the ordinance 
of the Holy Ghost, confirmed in the Christian faith 
by the universal world, S. John came into Greece 
where he conversed and converted much people 
and founded many churches in the Christian faith 
as well by miracles as by doctrine. 

In this time Domitian was Emperor of Rome, 
which made right great persecutions unto Christian 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


163 

men, and did do take S. John, and did him to be The 
brought to Rome and made him to be cast into a vat Life of 
or a ton full of hot oil in the presence of the senators, ** J ohn 
of which he issued out, by the help of God, more 
pure and more fair, without feeling of any more 
heat or chauffing, than he entered in. After this 
that emperor saw that he ceased not to preach the 
Christian faith, he sent him into exile unto an isle 
called Patmos. There was S. John alone, and 
was visited of angels and governed ; there wrote he 
by the revelation of our Lord the Apocalypse, 
which contained the secrets of holy church and of 
the world to come. 

In this same year was Domitian the emperor, 
for his evils, put to death, and all that he had done 
was revoked by the senators and defeated, and thus 
was S. John brought again from his exile with 
great honour into Ephesus ; and all the people of 
Ephesus came against him singing and saying: 

Blessed be he that cometh in the name of our 
Lord. In that way he raised a woman which was 
named Drusiana, which had much loved S. John 
and well kept his commandments. And her 
friends brought her tofore S. John all weeping 
and saying to him : Lo ! here is Drusiana which 
much loved thee and did thy commandments, 
and is dead, and desired nothing so much as thy 
return, and that she might see thee tofore her 
death. Now thou art come hither and she may 
not see thee. S. John had great pity on her that 
was dead, and of the people that wept for her, and 
commanded that they should set down the bier, 
and unbind and take away the clothes from her. 

And when they had so done he said, hearing all, 
with a loud voice, Drusiana, my Lord God Jesu 
Christ ariseth thee ; Drusiana arise, and go into 


Digitized by Google 



164 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The thy house, and make ready for me some refection. 

Life of Anon she arose and went in to her house for to do 
the commandment of S. John, and the people made 
three hours long a great noise and cry, saying there 
is but one God, and that is he whom S. John 
preacheth. 

It happed on another day that Crato the philo- 
sopher made a great assembly of people in the 
midst of the city, for to show to them how they 
ought to despise the world. And he had ordained 
two young men brethren which were much rich, 
and had made them to sell their patrimony and 
therewith to buy precious stones, the which these 
two young men brake in the presence of the people, 
for to show how these precious and great riches of 
the world be soon destroyed. That same time 
S. John passed by, and said to Crato the philo- 
sopher : This manner for to despise the world that 
thou showest is vain and foolish demonstrance, for 
it seeketh to have the praising of the world, and 
God reproveth it. My good master Jesu Christ 
said to a man that demanded of him how he might 
come to everlasting life, that he should go and sell 
his goods and give that he received of it to the 
poor people, and that he should find treasure in 
heaven. Crato said then to him : The price and 
value of these precious stones is destroyed in the 
presence of all men here, but if thy master be very 
God, and he will that the goods of the world be 
given to poor men, take then the pieces of these 
precious stones broken, and make them whole 
stones as they were tofore ; because if I have 
showed this by vain glory, make thou them to the 
honour of thy master. Anon, S. John took the 
pieces of the precious stones, and after that he had 
made his prayer to God, he showed to them the 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


165 

stones as whole as ever they were or had been. The 
When Crato the philosopher saw this, anon he jjife of 
with his two men and his disciples fell down to ^ 
the feet of S. John and received the faith and 
baptism of Jesu Christ, and sold the precious 
stones and gave the money thereof for the love of 
God, and begun to preach the faith of our Lord 
Jesu Christ. Then the two brethren, much rich 
and honoured in the city of Ephesus, anon they 
sold all their patrimony and gave it for the love of 
God. But after, when they came in to the city of 
Pergamia and saw them that had been their servants 
clothed in silk and in great honor of the world, 
and themselves having but a poor mantle or perad- 
venture a poor coat, anon they repented them that 
they had given away their goods in alms to poor 
people. This apperceived S. John and said to 
them: I see that ye be heavy and sorrowful of 
this, that after the doctrine of Jesu Christ ye have 
given your goods for God’s sake, wherefore if ye 
will have again the value of your goods, bring to 
me rods of the trees and stones of the rivage of 
the sea. And so they did, and when S. John had 
them, anon by his prayer he changed the rods into 
fine gold, and the common stones into precious 
stones, and S. John bade them to take them and 
show to the masters that had knowledge in such 
jewels if the rods were gold and the common 
stones precious stones. After they came again 
and said to S. John : Sire, the masters say they 
saw never so fine gold ne so precious stones. S. 

John then said to them : Go ye and buy ye again 
your lands that ye have sold, for ye have lost the 
reward of heaven, be ye rich temporally for to be 
beggars perpetually. Then began he to preach in 
despiting the riches, and to show six causes why 


Digitized by Google 



1 66 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The we ought to restrain us for to love riches, First, 
Life of the scripture learneth us to hate riches and reciteth 
John * n t j ie gogpei how the rich man that was clad in 
purple, and ate every day delicious meats glutton- 
ously, was lost and damned ; but the poor man at 
his gate that died full of sores and hungry, was 
saved. Secondly, nature teacheth us to hate 
riches, for we be born poor and naked, and poorly 
must we depart and die. Thirdly, the creature 
teacheth us how the sun, the moon, the stars, the 
rain and the air be common, and depart their in- 
fluences and their benefices largely. Fourthly, the 
man is not oft in one estate, for when he weeneth to 
be rich, plenteous and free, he findeth himself 
bond and captive. For the rich man adverse is 
bond and servant to the penny and the devil. 
Amator pecuniae servus est mammonae. Fifthly, 
sorrow and care, for by day and night he hath 
great labour in getting in and keeping of it, and great 
dread to lose that which he hath so dear and with 


great pain gotten. Sixthly, avaunting and praising, 
for the riches give occasion to be vain glorious 
and to praise and glorify himself. And by this it 
appeareth that presently is lost the weal of humility, 
without which the grace of God may not be had, 
and thus is gotten, for the world to come, pain 
and torment by over-great pride. Scripture then, 
nature, creature, fortune, business and care, 
avaunting and praising, ought to make us withdraw 
for to love riches. S. John approved to these 
two men his doctrine, with his miracles, to be 
true. And ye in the name of him did miracles 
tofore that ye were sorry and repented you of that 
ye had given your riches to poor people. Now is 
that grace from you departed and ye become 
meschant and wretches, which were in the faith 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


167 


strong and mighty. And tofore, the evil spirits 
had fear and dread of you, and by your com- 
mandment they issued out of bodies human, now 
have ye fear and dread of them and be become 
their servants. For whoso loveth the riches of 
this world, he is servant unto a devil named 
Mammon, and is bond and serf in keeping the 
riches in which he setteth his affiance. And 
hereof saith the Holy Ghost by the prophet 
David: In imagine pertransit homo, etc.: Vainly 
is the man distroubled which assembleth treasure in 
this world, and knoweth not for whom it is, for 
when he shall die he shall bear nothing with him, 
and he wotteth not who shall dispend it, for naked 
we came upon the earth and all naked shall we 
re-enter into it. And to a meschant man it sufficeth 
not when he hath enough, but he is busy day and 
night to get more without rest. For the riches 
make him fearful to lose that he hath gotten, and 
bringeth to him many businesses and evil rest in 
making worldly delights. And he, dispurveyed, 
death cometh which taketh all from him, and 
beareth nothing with him save his proper sins. 
When S. John had said all this there was brought 
tofore him a young man dead, which only had 
been in marriage thirty days. And his mother 
and friends wept sore, which tofore S. John 
kneeled down on their knees, praying him that he 
would raise him to life. S. John had great pity, 
and when he had long wept he bade to loose and 
unbind the body and said : O Satheus, which wert 
blinded with fleshly love, soon thou hast lost thy 
80&1, and because thou knewest not thy maker 
Jesu Christ* thou art fallen ignorantly into the 
leash of the right evil fiends, wherefore I weep 
and pray that thou mayst be releved from death 


The 
Life of 
S. John 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



168 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The to life, and show thou to these twain, Actius and 
Life of Eugenius, what great glory 
S* I 0 * 1 ® pain they have deserved. 

him in yielding thankings to S. John, and blamed 
much the two disciples in saying : I saw your two 
angels weep and the devils demene joy of your 
perdition, also I saw the realm of heaven made 
ready for you and full of all delights, and ye have 
follily gotten for you the place of hell, dark and 
tenebrous, full of dragons and of all pains, and 
therefore it behoveth you to pray to the apostle of 
God that he remise and bring you again to your 
salvation, like as he hath revived me goodly. 
And among all other pains, this Satheus reciteth 
these that be contained in two verses following : 

Vermes et umbras, flagellum, frigus et ignis, 

Dasmonis aspectus, scelerum confusio, luctus. 

that is to say: worms, darkness, scourges, cold, 
heat, sight of devil, confusion of sins, and wailing. 
Anon then these two men by right great repent- 
ance prayed S. John that he would pray for them, 
to whom S. John answered that they should do 
penance thirty days long, and pray to God that 
the rods of gold and the precious stones might 
return to their first proper natures. After these 
thirty days they came to S. John and said to 
him: Fair father, ye have always preached 
misericord and mercy, and commanded that one 
should pardon another his trespass, we be contrite 
and repentant of our sins and weep with our eyes 
for this evil worldly covetise, the which we have 
by them received, and therefore we pray you that 
ye have mercy on us. And S. John answered : 
Our Lord God when he made mention of the 
sinner he said, I will not the death of the 


they have lost and what 
Anon Satheus releved 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 169 

sinner, but that he be converted and live, for great 
joy is in Heaven of a sinner repentant. And 
therefore know ye that he hath received your 
repentance, go ye forth and bear the rods and 
stones thither where ye took them, for they be 
returned to their first nature. Thus received they 
the grace that they had lost, so that after they did 
great miracles in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ. 

And then after this when the blessed apostle S. 
John had preached through all Asia, and sown 
the word of Christ, they that worshipped idols 
moved the people against S. John, and came and 
drove him into the temple of Diana for to constrain 
him to do sacrifice unto that idol. To whom S. 
John said: Sith ye believe that your goddess 
Diana hath so great power, call ye upon her and 
require her by her power she subvert and over- 
throw the Church of Christ, and if she so do, I 
shall do sacrifice to her, and if she do it not, then 
let me pray unto my God Jesu Christ that he 
overthrow her temple, and if he so do then believe 
ye in him. To this sentence the most part of the 
people consented, and so they prayed, and nothing 
they could not do ne prevail against the Church of 
Christ. But S. John made his prayers and anon 
the temple of Diana fell down and was overthrown, 
so that the foundement turned up so down, and the 
image of Diana all-to dashed and destroyed. And 
that same day were converted to Christ’s faith 
twelve thousand men of the Gentiles, besides 
women and children. Then Aristodemus, bishop 
of the idols, stirred and moved sedition among the 
people, in such wise that that one party made them 
ready to battle against that other party. Then 
said the apostle to him : What wilt thou that I do 
that thou mayest be pleased? To whom the 


The 
Life of 
S. John 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



170 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The bishop said : If thou wilt that I believe in thy 

S John ^ 8* ve t0 venom 10 drink, and if it 
* * hurt not thee, then thy Lord is very God. Then 
said S. John : Do as thou hast said. Then said 
the bishop: I will first that thou see others die 
thereof tofore, because thou shouldst the more 
dread it. Then went Aristodemus to the pro- 
consul of the city and demanded of him two men 
judged to death for to have been beheaded, and 
tofore them all, he gave to them to drink the 
venom, which men as soon as they had drunken 
it incontinent died. Then S. John took the cup 
with the venom and blessed it with the sign of the 
cross, and drank it of every deal and had ne felt 
none hurt ne harm, wherefore all the people gave 
laud and praising to God. Aristodemus said * 
Yet have I a doubt, but and if thou raise to life 
again the dead men that drank the venom, without 
doubt then shall I believe. Then the apostle 
delivered him his coat, to whom he said 2 Why 
givest thou to me thy coat ? And S. John said 
because that thou ashamed and confused shalt go 
from and forsake thy infidelity. To whom he 
said : Trowest thou that thy coat shall make me 
believe? And the apostle said : Go and lay it 
upon the bodies of the dead men, saying : The 
apostle of Christ hath sent me to you that ye arise 
in the name of Christ, which when he had done, 
anon they arose from death to life. Then the 
apostle baptized the bishop and the proconsul, 
believing in Christ, with all their kin and friends, 
which anon brake all their simulachres, and in the 
same place edified a church in the worship of God 
and of S. John. The holy S. Clement rehearseth 
in the fourth book of Historia Ecclesiastica, that 
on a time S. John the Evangelist converted to the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


171 


faith a goodly young man, well-favoured and strong, The 
and commanded him unto the keeping, rule, and of 
governance of a bishop. And within a little while 
after, this young man forsook the bishop and fell 
into evil company among thieves, and became and 
was made master and prince of them. Anon 
after, the apostle came to the bishop and demanded 
for the young man, and the bishop was sore 
abashed. When S. John saw his countenance he 
demanded more busilier after him, and where he 
had left him, for I ask him of thee, whom I 
delivered to thee, and gave thee so great charge 
with him. Then said the bishop to him : Father, 
truly he is dead in his soul, and is in yonder 
mountain with thieves, and is their master and 
prince. And when he heard that, for sorrow he 
rent his clothes, and said to the bishop : Thou art 
a feeble keeper for to suffer thy brother to lose 
his soul. Anon he made a horse to be made ready 
for him, and rode fast to the mountain, and when 
the young man espied and knew him he was so 
sore ashamed that he fled from him. Then the 
apostle forgot his age and pricked after, and cried 
after him that fled: My most sweet son, why 
fleest thou from thy father feeble and old ? Be 
thou not afeard, son, for I shall yield account for 
thee to Jesu Christ, and truly I shall gladly die for 
thee like as Jesu Christ died for us. Turn again 
my son, turn again, Jesu Christ hath sent me to 
thee. And when he heard him thus speak he 
abode with a heavy cheer and wept, repenting him 
bitterly, and fell down to the feet of the apostle, 
and for penance kissed his hand. And the 
apostle fasted and prayed to God for him, and 
gat for him remission of his sins and forgiveness. 


Digitized by Google 



172 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The and he lived so virtuously after, that S. John 
Life of ordained him to be a bishop. 

Also it is read in the same history that S. John 
on a time entered into a bath for to wash him. 


and there he found Cerinthus an heretic, whom as 
soon as he saw he eschewed, and went out of it 
saying : Let us flee and go hence lest the bath fall 
upon us in which Cerinthus the enemy of truth 
washeth him, and as soon as he was out the bath 
fell down. 


Cassiodorus saith that a man had given to S. 
John a partridge living, and he held it in his hand 
stroking and playing with it otherwhile for his 
recreation. And on a time a young man passed 
by with his fellowship and saw him play with his 
bird, which said to his fellows, laughing : See how 
the yonder old man playeth with a bird like a 
child. Which S. John knew anon, by the Holy 
Ghost, what he had said, and called the young 
man to him and demanded him what he held in 


his hand, and he said a bow. What dost thou 
withal? said S. John. And the young man 
said: We shoot birds and beasts therewith, to 


whom the apostle demanded how and in what 
manner. Then the young man bent his bow and 
held it in his hand bent, and when the apostle said 
no more to him he unbent his bow again. Then 
said the apostle to him : Why hast thou unbent 
thy bow ? And he said : Because if it should be 
long bent it should be the weaker for to shoot with 
it. Then said the apostle, So son, it fareth by 
mankind and by frailty in contemplation, if it 
should alway be bent it should be too weak, 
and therefor otherwhile it is expedient to have 
recreation. The eagle is the bird that flyeth 
highest, and most clearly beholdeth the sun, and 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


173 


yet by necessity of nature him behoveth to descend The 
low, right so when mankind withdraweth him a Jjife of 
little from contemplation, he after putteth himself ■ J olin 
higher by a renewed strength, and he burneth then 
more fervently in heavenly things. 

S. John wrote his gospels after the other 
Evangelists, the year after the ascension of our 
Lord sixty-six, after this that the venerable Bede 
saith. And when he was required and prayed of 
the bishops of the country of Ephesus to write 
them, S. John prayed also to them, that they 
should fast and pray in their dioceses three days 
tor him to the end that he might truly write them. 

S. Jerome saith of this glorious apostle S. John, 
that, when he was so old, so feeble and so 
unmighty that his disciples sustained and bare 
him in going to church, and as of times he rested, 
he said to his disciples: Fair children, love ye 
together, and each of you love other. And then 
his disciples demanded why and wherefore he 
said to them so oft such words. He answered to 
them and said: Our Lord had so commanded, 
and whosomever accomplished well this command- 
ment it should suffice him for to be saved. And 
finally after that he had founded many churches 
and had ordained bishops and priests in them, and 
confirmed them by his predication in the Christian 
faith, the year sixty-eight after the resurrection of 
Jesu Christ, for he was thirty-one years old when 
our Lord was crucified, and lived after sixty-eight 
years, and thus was all his age ninety-nine years. 

Then came our Lord with his disciples to him 
and said: Come my friend to me, for it is time 
that thou come, eat and be fed at my table with 
thy brethren. Then S. John arose up and said to 
our Lord Jesu Christ, that he had desired it long 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



174 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The time, and began to go. Then said our Lord to 
Life of him : On Sunday next coming thou shalt come to 
S. John me# That Sunday the people came all to the 
church, which was founded in his name and con- 
secrate on that one side of Ephesus, and from 
midnight forth he ceased not to preach to the 
people that they should establish them and be 
stedfast in the Christian faith and obeissant to the 
commandments of God. And after this he said 
the mass, and houseled and communed the people : 
and after that the mass was finished he bade and 
did do make a pit or a sepulture tofore the altar ; 
and after that he had taken his leave and com- 
mended the people to God, he descended down 
into the pit or sepulture tofore the altar, and held 
up his hands to heaven and said: Sweet Lord 
Jesu Christ, I yield me unto thy desire, and thank 
thee that thou hast vouchsafed to call me to thee, 
if it please thee, receive me for to be with my 
brethren, with whom thou hast summoned me, 
open to me the gate of the life permanable, and 
lead me to the feast of thy well and best dressed 
meats. Thou art Christ the son of the living God, 
which by the commandment of the father hast 
saved the world, to thee I render and yield grace 
and thankings, world without end, thou knowest 
well that I have desired thee with all my heart. 
After that he had made his prayer much amorously 
and piteously, anon came upon him great clearness 
and light, and so great brightness that none might 
see him, and when this light and brightness was 
gone and departed, there was nothing found in the 
pit or grave but manna, which came springing 
from under upward, like as sand in a fountain or 
springing well, where much people have been 
delivered of many diseases and sicknesses by the 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*75 

merits and prayers of this glorious saint. Some The 
say and afRrm that he died without pain of death, Life of 
and that he was in that clearness borne into heaven J 0 * 111 
body and soul, whereof God knoweth the certainty. 

And we, that be yet here beneath in this misery, 
ought to pray devoutly to him that he would 
impetre and get to us the grace of our Lord 
which is blessed in secula seculorum. Amen. 

There was a king, a holy confessor and virgin, 
named S. Edward, which had a special devotion 
unto S. John Evangelist, and it happed that this 
holy king was at the hallowing of a church 
dedicate in the honour of God and of this holy 
apostle ; and it was that S. John in likeness of a 
pilgrim came to this king and demanded his alms 
in the name of S. John, and the king not having 
his almoner by him, ne his chamberlain, of whom 
he might have somewhat to give him, took his ring 
which he bare on his finger and gave it to the 
pilgrim. After these many days, it happened two 
pilgrims of England for to be in the Holy Land, 
and S. John appeared to them and bade them to 
bear this ring to their king and to greet him well 
in his name, and to tell him that he gave it to S. 

John in likeness of a pilgrim, and that he should 
make him ready to depart out of this world, for 
he should not long abide here but come into ever- 
lasting bliss, and so vanished from them. And 
anon as he was gone they had great lust to sleep, 
and laid them down and slept, and this was in the 
Holy Land, and when they awoke they looked 
about them and knew not where they were. And 
they saw flocks of sheep and shepherds keeping 
them, to whom they went to know the way, and 
to demand where they were, and when they asked 
them they spake English and said that they were 

VOL. II. m 

Digitized by Google 



176 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The 
History 
of the 
Innocents 


in England, in Kent on Barham Down. And then 
they thanked God and S. John for their good 
speed, and came to this holy king S. Edward on 
Christmas day, and delivered to him the ring and 
did their errand, whereof the king was abashed, 
and thanked God and the holy saint that he had 
warning for to depart. And on the vigil of the 
Epiphany next after he died and departed holily 
out of this world, and is buried in the Abbey of 
Westminster by London where is yet to this day 
the same ring. 

Isidore, in the book of the life and death of 
holy saints and fathers, saith this : S. John the 
Evangelist transformed and turned rods of trees 
into fine gold, the stones and gravel of the sea into 
precious gems and ouches, the small broken 
pieces of gems he reformed into their first nature, 
he raised a widow from death, and brought again 
the soul of a young man into his body, he drank 
venom without hurt or peril, and them that had 
been dead by the same he recovered into the state 
oflife. 


Here followeth the History of the Innocents • 

The Innocents be called innocents for three 
reasons. First, by cause and reason of life, and by 
reason of pain, and by reason of innocence. By 
reason of life they be said innocents because they 
had an innocent life. They grieved nobody, 
neither God, by inobedience, ne their neighbours 
by untruth, ne by conceiving of any sin, and 
therefore it is said in the psalter : The innocents 
and righteous have joined them to me. The 
innocents by their life and righteousness in the 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 177 

faith, by reason of pain, for they suffered death The 
innocently and wrongly, whereof David saith : 

They have shed the blood of innocents by reason indents 
of innocency that they had, because that in this 
martyrdom they were baptized and made clean of 
the original sin, of which innocence is said in the 
psalter : Keep thou innocency of baptism and see 
equity of good works. 

Holy church maketh feast of the Innocents 
which were put to death because of our Lord Jesu 
Christ. For Herod Ascalonita for to find and put 
to death our Lord which was born in Bethlehem, 
he did do slay all the children in Bethlehem and 
there about, from the age of two years and under 
unto one day, unto the sum of one hundred and 
forty-four thousand children. For to understand 
which Herod it was that so cruelly did do put so 
many children to death, it is to wit that there 
were three Herods, and all three were cruel 
tyrants, and were in their time of great fame and 
much renowned for their great malice. The first 
was Herod Ascalonita : he reigned in Jerusalem 
when our Lord was born. The second was 
Herod Antipas, to whom Pilate sent Jesu Christ 
in the time of his passion, and he did do smite off 
S. John Baptist’s head. The third was Herod 
Agrippa, which did do smite off S. James’s head, 
said, in Galicia, and set S. Peter in prison. But 
now let us come to this first Herod that did do 
slay the innocent children. His father was named 
Antipater as history scholastic saith, and was king 
of Idumea and paynim ; he took a wife which was 
niece to the king of Arabia, on whom he had 
three sons and a daughter, of whom that one was 
named Herod Ascalonita. This Herod served so 
well to Julian the emperor of Rome that he gave 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



i7» 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The to him the realm of Jerusalem. Then lost the 
History Jews kings of their lineage, and then was showed 
Innocents ^ prophecy of the birth of our Lord. This 
Herod Ascalonita had six sons, Antipater, 
Alexander, Aristobulus, Archelaus, Herod Anti- 
pas, and Philip. Of these children, Herod sent 
Alexander and Aristobulus to school to Rome, and 
Alexander became a wise and subtle advocate. And 
when they were come from school again they began 
to enter into words against Herod their father, to 
whom he would leave his realm after him, where- 
fore their father was angry with them, and put 
tofore them Antipater their brother for to come to 
the realm. Upon that, incontinent they treated of 
the death of their father, wherefore their father 
enchased them away, and they went again to Rome 
and complained of their father to the emperor. 

Anon after this came the three kings in to 
Jerusalem, and demanded where the king of Jews 
was, that was new born. Herod when he heard 
this, he had great dread lest any were born of the 
true lineage of the kings of the Jews, and that he 
were the very true heir, and of whom he might 
be chased out of the realm. And when he had 
demanded of the three kings how they had had 
knowledge of the new king, they answered by a 
star being in the air, which was not naturally 
fixed in the heaven as the others were. Then he 
prayed them that they would return to him after 
that they had worshipped and seen this new king, 
that he might go after and worship the child. 
This said he fraudulently, for he thought to slay 
him. After that the three kings were gone 
without bringing him any tidings, he thought that 
anon he would do slay all the children newly born 
in Bethlehem and thereabouts, among whom he 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


179 


thought to slay Jesu Christ. But his thought was 
empeshed and let, for the emperor sent to him 
a citation that he should come to Rome for to 
answer to the accusation that Aristobulus and 
Alexander, his two sons, had made against him, 
and therefore he durst not put then the children to 
death, to the end that he should not be accused of 
so cruel a deed with his other trespasses ; so he 
was in going to Rome and abiding there, and in 
coming, more than half a year, and in that while 
Jesus was borne into Egypt. When Herod came 
to Rome the emperor ordained that his sons should 
do him honour and obey him, and he should leave 
his realm after his death where it best pleased him. 
Upon this, when he was come again, and felt 
himself confirmed of the realm, he was more hardy 
to slay the children than he had tofore thought. 
Then he sent into Bethlehem and did do slay all 
the children that we;e of the age of two years, 
because it was passed more than a year that the 
three kings had told him tidings of the king of 
Jews new-born. But wherefore then did he do 
slay the children that were but one night old? 
Hereto S. Austin saith that Herod doubted that 
Jesus, to whom the stars served, might make 
himself some younger than he was. After this 
came upon Herod a right vengeance, for like as he 
dissevered many mothers from their children, in 
like wise was he dissevered from his children. It 
happed that he had suspicion upon his two sons, 
Alexander and Aristobulus ; for one of his servants 
said to him that Alexander had promised to him 
great gifts if he would give to his father to drink 
poison or venom, and the barber said to the king 
that he had promised him a great thing if, when 
he made the king’s beard, he would cut his throat. 


The 
History 
of the 
Innocents 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



180 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The and for this cause Herod did do slay them both. 
History and ordained in his testament that Antipater, his 
Innocents 80n > should be king after him. Upon this Anti- 
pater, his son, had great desire to come to the 
realm, and was accused that he had made ready 
venom for to empoison his father, for a maid, a 
servant, afterward showed the same venom to the 
king, wherefore he did do put his son Antipater in 
prison. When Augustus, the emperor of Rome, 
heard say that Herod ruled thus his children, he 
then said : I had liefer be the swine or hog of 
Herod than his son, for he which is strange in his 
living spareth his swine, and he put to death his 
sons. 

Herod when he was seventy years old he fell in 
a grievous malady by right vengeance of God, for 
a strong fever took him within and without ; he 
had his flesh hot and dry chauffed, his feet swelled 
and became of a pale colour. The plants of his 
feet under began to rot, in such wise that vermin 
issued out, and a stench issued so great out of his 
breath and of his members without forth, that no 
persons might suffer it. On that other side he had 
great grief and annoy of the anger that he had for 
his sons. When the masters and physicians saw 
that he might not be holpen by no medicine, then 
they said that this malady was a vengeance of God, 
and for as much as he heard say that the Jews 
were glad of his malady and sickness, therefore 
he did do assemble the most noble of the Jews 
out of the good towns, and did do put them in 
prison and said to Salome, his sister, and to 
Alexander her husband: I know well that the 
Jews shall be glad of my death, but if ye will do 
my counsel and obey to me I shall mowe have 
great plaint and wailing of many that shall beweep 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 181 

my death, in this wise that I shall show you. 
Anon as I shall be dead, do ye to be slain all the 
noble Jews that be in prison, and thus shall be no 
house of the Jews, but they shall, against their will, 
beweep my death. And he had a custom to eat 
an apple last after meat. On a time he demanded 
a knife for to pare the apple, and one delivered 
him a knife, and shortly he took it, as all despaired, 
and would have slain himself, but anon Aciabus, his 
neighbour, caught his hand and cried loud, that it 
was supposed that the king had died. Antipater his 
son, which was in prison, had heard the cry and 
weened his father had been dead. He was glad, 
and promised to the keepers of the prison great 
gifts for to let him out. When Herod knew this 
by his servant, he travailed the more grievously 
because his son was more glad of his death than of 
his sickness and anon did do slay him, and 
ordained in his testament, Archelaus to be king 
after him, and he lived but five days after and died 
in great misery of annoy. Salome, his sister, did 
not his commandment of the Jews that were in 
prison, but let them go out. And Archelaus 
became king after Herod his father, which as to 
strangers in the battle he was fortunate and happy, 
but as to his own people he was right unhappy. 
Then I return again ; after that, Joseph was gone 
with our Lord into Egypt and was there seven 
years, unto the death of Herod. And after the 
prophecy of Isaiah, at the entering of our Lord 
into Egypt, the idols fell down, for like as at 
departing of the children out of Egypt, in every 
house the oldest son of the Egyptians lay one dead, 
in like wise at the coming of our Lord lay down 
the idols in the temples. 

Cas8iodorus saith in the History tripartite, in 


The 
History 
of the 
Innocents 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



182 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life Hermopolin of Thebaid there was a tree called 
Th°mas ^ >ers ^^ 8 » which is medicinal for all sicknesses, for 
of Canter- ^ or r ^ n< ^ °f *^ at tree be bound to the 

bury neck of the sick person, it healeth him anon, and 
as the blessed Virgin Mary fled with her son, that 
tree bowed down and worshipped Jesu Christ. 
Also Macrobius saith in a chronicle that, a young 
son of Herod was nourished at that time, and he 
was slain among the other children. And then 
was fulfilled the prophecy saying : The voice is 
heard in Rama of great weeping and wailing, that 
the sorrowful mothers wept for the death of their 
children, and might not be comforted, because they 
were not alive. 


Here fottoweth the Life of S. Thomas , martyr , of 

Canterbury , and first the exposition of his name . 

Thomas is as much to say as abisme or double, 
or trenched and hewn, he was an abisme profound 
in humility, as it appeared in the hair that he 
wore, and in washing of the feet of the poor 
people, double in prelation that was in word and 
in ensample, and hewn and trenched in his passion. 
S. Thomas the martyr was son to Gilbert Beckett, 
a burgess of the city of London, and was born in 
the place where as now standeth the church called 
S. Thomas of Acre. And this Gilbert was a 
good devout man, and took the cross upon him, 
and went on pilgrimage into the Holy Land, and 
had a servant with him. And when he had 
accomplished his pilgrimage, he was taken home- 
ward by the heathen men and brought into the 
prison of a prince named Amurath, where long 
time he and his fellowship suffered much pain 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 183 

and sorrow. And the prince had great affection The Life 
towards this Gilbert, and had often communication of S. 
with him of the Christian faith, and of the realm 
of England, by which conversation it fortuned that 
the daughter of this prince had especial love unto 
this Gilbert, and was familiar with him. And 
on a time she disclosed her love to him, saying if 
he would promise to wed her she should forsake 
friends, heritage and country, for his love and 
become Christian, and after long communication 
between them he promised to wed her if she 
would become Christian, and told to her the place 
of his dwelling in England. And after, by the 
purveyance of God, the said Gilbert escaped and 
came home. And after this it fortuned so that 
this prince’ 8 daughter stole privily away, and 
passed many a wild place and great adventure, and 
by God’ 8 purveyance at last came to London 
demanding and crying Becket ! Becket ! for more 
English could she not 5 wherefore the people drew 
about her, what for the strange array of her, as 
for that they understood her not, and many a 
shrewd boy. So long she went till she came 
tofore Gilbert’ 8 door, and as she stood there, the 
servant that had been with Gilbert in prison which 
was named Richard, saw her and knew thkt it 
was she, and went in to his master, and told him 
how that this maid stood at his door ; and anon 
he went out to see her. And as soon as she saw 
him she fell in a swoon for joy, and Gilbert took 
her up, and comforted her, and brought her into his 
house, and sith went to the bishops, which then were 
six at Paul’s, and rehearsed all the matter, and after 
they christened her, and forthwith wedded her 
unto Gilbert Becket, and within time reasonable 
and accustomed, was brought forth between them 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



184 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life a fair son named Thomas. And after this, yet the 
of S. 8a id Gilbert went again to the Holy Land and 
of Canter^ was t ^ iere t ^ iree years ere he came again. And 
bury this child grew forth till he was set to school, and 
learned well and became virtuous, and when he 
was twenty-four years old his mother passed out of 
this world. And after this he served a merchant 
of London a while in keeping his charge and 
accompts, and from him he went to Stigand, arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, and he was in so great 
favour with him that he made him archdeacon 
and chief of his counsel, and well executed he his 
office in punishing the culpable and cherishing the 
good people. And divers times went to Rome 
for to support and help holy church. And after 
this Henry n. that was the emperor’s son was 
made king of England, and he ordained this 
Thomas his chancellor, and had great rule, and 
the land stood in prosperity. And S. Thomas 
stood so greatly in the king’s favour that the king 
was content with all that he did, and when the 
king went into Normandy he betook the governance 
of his son and the realm into the rule of S. Thomas, 
which he wisely governed till his return again. 
And anon after died Theobald, the archbishop 
of Canterbury, and then the king gave his nomina- 
tion to S. Thomas, and by the chapter was elected 
in the year of his age, forty-four, and was full loth 
to take that great charge upon him. And so at 
last, his bulls had, he was sacred and stalled and 
became a holy man, suddenly changed into a new 
man, doing great penance, as in wearing hair with 
knots, and a breech of the same down to the 
knees. And on a Trinity Sunday received he 
his dignity, and there was at that time the king 
with many a great lord and sixteen bishops. And 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


185 


from thence was sent the abbot of Evesham to the The Life 
pope with other clerks for the pall which he gave Jj * S* 
and brought to him, and he full meekly received 
it. And under his habit he ware the habit of a bmy 
monk, and so was he under within forth a monk, 
and outward a clerk, and did great abstinence 
making his body lean and his soul fat. And he 
used to be well served at his table, and took but 
little refection thereof, and lived holily in giving 
good ensample. 

After this, many times the king went over into 
Normandy, and in his absence always S. Thomas 
had the rule of his son and of the realm, which 
was governed so well that the king could him 
great thanks, and then abode long m this realm. 

And when so was that the king did any thing 
against the franchise and liberties of holy church, 

S. Thomas would ever withstand it to his power. 

And on a time when the sees of London and of 
Winchester were vacant and void, the king kept 
them both long in his hand for to have the profits 
of them ; wherefore S. Thomas was heavy, and 
came to the king and desired him to give those 
two bishopricks to some virtuous men. And anon 
the king granted to him his desire and ordained 
one master Roger, bishop of Winchester, and the 
Earl of Gloucester’s son, bishop of London, 
named Sir Robert. And anon after S. Thomas 
hallowed the abbey of Reading, which the first 
Henry founded. And that same year he trans- 
lated S. Edward, king and confessor at West- 
minster, where he was laid in a rich shrine. And 
in some short time after, by the enticement of the 
devil, fell great debate, variance, and strife, between 
the king and S. Thomas, and the king sent for all 
the bishops to appear tofore him at Westminster 


Digitized by CjOOQIC 



1 86 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life at a certain day, at which day they assembled 
of S. tofore him, whom he welcomed, and after said to 
of CanteJf them how that the archbishop would destroy his 
bury l aw > an( l not suffer him to enjoy such things as his 
predecessors had used tofore him. Whereto S. 
Thomas answered that he never intended to do 
thing that should displease the king as far as it 
touched not the franchise and liberties of holy 
church. Then the king rehearsed how he would 
not suffer clerks that were thieves to have the 
execution of the law ; to which S. Thomas said, 
that he ought not to execute them, but they 
longeth to the correction of holy church, and 
other divers points ; to which S. Thomas would 
not agree. To the which the king said : Now I 
see well that thou wouldest foredo the laws of this 
land which have been used in the days of my 
predecessors, but it shall not lie in thy power, and 
so the king being wroth departed. Then the 
bishops all counselled S. Thomas to follow the 
king’s intent, or else the land should be in great 
trouble ; and in like wise the lords temporal that 
were his friends counselled him the same, and S. 
Thomas said : I take God to record it was never 
mine intent to displease the king, or to take any 
thing that longeth to his right or honour. And 
then the lords were glad and brought him to the 
king to Oxenford, and the king deigned not to 
speak to him. And then the king called all the 
lords spiritual and temporal tofore him, and said 
he would have all the laws of his forefathers there 
new confirmed, and there they were confirmed 
by all the lords spiritual and temporal. And 
after this the king charged them for to come to 
him to Clarendon to his parliament at a certain 
day assigned, on pain to run in his indignation, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


187 


and at that time so departed. And this parliament The Life 
was holden at Clarendon, the eleventh year of the J^S. 
king’s reign, and the year of our Lord eleven ofC^ter 
hundred and sixty-four. At this parliament were bmy 
many lords which all were against S. Thomas. 

And then the king sitting in his parliament, in the 
presence of all his lords, demanded them if they 
would abide and keep the laws that had been used 
in his forefathers’ days. Then S. Thomas spake 
for the part of holy church, and said : Ail old 
laws that be good and rightful, and not against our 
mother holy church, I grant with good will to 
keep them. And then the king said that he 
would not leave one point of his law, and waxed 
wroth with S. Thomas. And then certain bishops 
required S. Thomas to obey to the king’s desire 
and will, and S. Thomas desired respite to know 
the laws, and then to give him an answer. 

And when he understood them all, to some he 
consented, but many he denied and would never be 
agreeable to them, wherefore the king was wroth 
and said he would hold and keep them like as his 
predecessors had done before him, and would not 
minish one point of them. Then S. Thomas said 
to the king with full great sorrow and heavy cheer, 

Now, my most dear lord and gracious king, have 
pity on us of holy church, your bedemen, and 
give to us respite for a certain time. And thus 
departed each man. And S. Thomas went to 
Winchester, and there prayed our Lord devoutly 
for holy church, and to give him aid and strength 
for to defend it, for utterly he determined to abide 
by the liberties and franchise, and fell down on his 
knees and said, full sore weeping : O good Lord, 

I acknowledge that I have offended, and for mine 
offence and trespass this trouble cometh to holy 


Digitized by Google 



1 88 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life church, I purpose, good Lord, to go to Rome for 
ofS. to be assoiled of mine offences; and departed 
of Caoteiv towar< * 8 Canterbury. And anon the king sent his 
officers to his manors and despoiled them, because 
he would not obey the king’s statutes. And the 
king commanded to seize all his lands and goods 
into his hands, and then his servants departed from 
him, and he went to the seaside for to have gone % 
over sea, but the wind was against him, and so 
thrice he took his ship and might not pass. And 
then he knew that it was not our Lord/s will that 
he should yet depart, and returned secretly to 
Canterbury, of whose coming his meiny made 
great joy. And on the morn came the king’s 
officers for to seize all his goods, for the noise 
was that S. Thomas had fled the land ; wherefore 
they had despoiled all his manors and seized them 
into the king’s hand. And when they came they 
found him at Canterbury, whereof they were sore 
abashed, and returned to the king informing him 
that he was yet at Canterbury, and anon after S. 
Thomas came to the king to Woodstock for to 
pray him to be better disposed towards holy 
church. And then said the king to him in 
scorn: May not we two dwell both in this 

land ? Art thou so sturdy and hard of heart ? To 
whom S. Thomas answered : Sire, that was never 
my thought, but I would fain please you, and do 
all that you desire so that ye hurt not the liberties 
of holy church, for them will I maintain while I 
live, ever to my power. With which words the 
king was sore moved, and swore that he would 
have them kept, and especial if a clerk were a 
thief he should be judged and executed by the 
king’s law, and by no spiritual law, and said he 
would never suffer a clerk to be his master in his 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


1S9 


own land, and charged S. Thomas to appear 
before him at Northampton, and to bring all the 
bishops of this land with him, and so departed. 
S. Thomas besought God of help and succour, 
for the bishops which ought to be with him were 
most against him. After this S. Thomas went 
to Northampton where the king had then his great 
council in the castle with all his lords, and when 
he came tofore the king he said : I am come to 
obey your commandment, but before this time was 
never bishop of Canterbury thus entreated, for I 
am head of the Church of England, and am to 
you, Sir King, your ghostly father, and it was 
never God’s law that the son should destroy his 
father which hath charge of his soul. And by 
your striving have you made all the bishops that 
should abide by the right of the church to be 
against holy church and me, and ye know well 
that I may not fight, but am ready to suffer death 
rather than I should consent to lose the right of 
holy church. Then said the king, Thou speakest 
as a proud clerk, but I shall abate thy pride ere 
I leave thee, for I must reckon with thee. Thou 
understandest well that thou wert my chancellor 
many years, and once I lent to thee £$00 
which thou never yet hast repaid, which I will 
that thou pay me again or else incontinent thou 
shalt go to prison. And then S. Thomas an- 
swered : Ye gave me that £ 500, and it is not fitting 
to demand that which ye have given. Notwith- 
standing he found surety for the said ^500 and 
departed for that day. And after this, the next 
day the king demanded ^30,000 that he had 
surmised on him to have stolen, he being chan- 
cellor, whereupon he desired day to answer; at 
which time he said that when he was archbishop 


Digitized by 


Google 


The Life 
of S. 
Thomas 
of Canter- 
bury 



190 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life he set him free therein without any claim or debt 
of S. before good record, wherefore he ought not to 
of Canta^ an8Wer unto that demand. And the bishops de- 
bury ^ re d S. Thomas to obey the king but in no wise 
he would not agree to such things as should touch 
against the liberties of the church. And then they 
came to the king, and forsook S. Thomas, and 
agreed to all the king’s desire, and the proper 
servants of S. Thomas fled from him and forsook 
him, and then poor people came and accompanied 
him. And on the night came to him two lords 
and told to him that the king’s meiny had emprised 
to slay him. And the next night after he departed 
in the habit of a brother of Sempringham, and so 
chevissed that he went over sea. 

And in the meanwhile certain bishops went to 
Rome for to complain on him to the pope, and 
the king sent letters to the king of France not 
to receive him. And the King Louis said that, 
though a man were banished and had committed 
there trespasses, yet should he be free in France. 
And so after when this holy S. Thomas came, he 
received him well, and gave him licence to abide 
there and do what he would. In this meanwhile 
the king of England sent certain lords unto the 
pope complaining on the Archbishop Thomas, 
which made grievous complaints, which when the 
pope had heard said, he would give none answer 
till that he had heard the Archbishop Thomas 
speak, which would hastily come thither. But they 
would not abide his coming, but departed without 
speeding of their intents, and came into England 
again. And anon after, S Thomas came to 
Rome on S. Mark’s day at afternoon, and when 
his caterer should have bought fish for his dinner 
because it was fasting day, he could get none for 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


191 


co money, and came and told to his lord S. The Life 
Thomas so, and he bade him buy such as he of S. 
could get, and then he bought flesh and made it f 
ready for their dinner. And S. Thomas was {Jury 
served with a capon roasted, and his meiny with 
boiled meat. And so it was that the pope heard 
that he was come, and sent a cardinal to welcome 
him, and he found him at his dinner eating flesh, 
which anon returned and told to the pope how he 
was not so perfect a man as he had supposed, for 
contrary to the rule of the church he eateth this 
day flesh. The pope would not believe him, but 
sent another cardinal which for more evidence 
took the leg of the capon in his kerchief and 
affirmed the same, and opened his kerchief tofore 
the pope, and he found the leg turned into a fish 
called a carp. And when the pope saw it, he 
said, they were not true men to say such things of 
this good bishop. They said faithfully that it 
was flesh that he ate. Aiter this S. Thomas came 
to the pope and did his reverence and obedience, 
whom the pope welcomed, and after communica- 
tion he demanded him what meat he had eaten, 
and he said : Flesh as ye have heard tofore, because 
he could find no fish and very need compelled him 
thereto. Then the pope understood of the 
miracle that the capon’s leg was turned into a 
carp, and of his goodness granted to him and to 
all them of the diocese of Canterbury licence to 
eat flesh ever after on S. Mark’s day when it 
falleth on a fish day, and pardon withal, which is 
kept and accustomed unto this day. And then 
S. Thomas informed the pope how the king of 
England would have him consent to divers articles 
against the liberties of holy church, and what 
wrongs he did to the same, and that for to die he 

VOL. 11. n 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



192 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life would never consent to them. And when the 
of S. pope had heard him he wept for pity, and thanked 
of Canted that he had such a bishop under him that 
bjiry had so well defended the liberties of holy church, 
and anon wrote out letters and bulls commanding 
all the bishops of Christendom to keep and observe 
the same. And then S. Thomas offered to the 
pope his bishopric up into the pope’s hand, and 
his mitre with the cross and ring, and the pope 
commanded him to keep it still, and said he knew 
no man more able than he was. And after S. 
Thomas said mass tofore the pope in a white 
chasuble ; and after mass he said to the pope that 
he knew by revelation that he should suffer death 
for the right of holy church, and when it should 
fall that chasuble should be turned from white into 
red. And after he departed from the pope and 
came down into France unto the abbey of Pont- 
igny, and there he had knowledge that when the 
lords spiritual and temporal which had been at 
Rome were come home and had told the king that 
they might in no wise have their intent, that the king 
was greatly wroth, and anon banished all the kinsmen 
that were longing to S. Thomas that they should 
incontinent void his land, and made them swear 
that they should go to him and tell to him that for 
his sake they were exiled, and so they went over 
sea to him at Pontigny and he being there was 
full sorry for them. And after there was a great 
chapter in England of the monks of Citeaux and 
there the king desired them to write to Pontigny 
that they should no longer keep ne sustain Thomas 
the Archbishop, for if they did, he would destroy 
them of that order being in England. And, for 
fear thereof they wrote so over to Pontigny that 
he must depart thence with his kinsmen, and so he 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


193 


did, and was then full heavy, and remitted his The Life 
cause to God. And anon after, the king of °f S. 
France sent to him that he should abide where it ^Quiter 
pleased him, and dwell in his realm, and he would 
pay for the costs of him and his kinsmen. And 
he departed and went to Sens, and the abbot 
brought him on the way. And S. Thomas told 
him how he knew by a vision that he should suffer 
death and martyrdom for the right of the church, 
and prayed him to keep it secret during his life. 

After this the king of England came into France, 
and there told the king how S. Thomas would 
destroy his realm, and then there told how he 
would foredo such laws as his elders had used tofore 
him, wherefore S. Thomas was sent for, and they 
were brought together. And the king of France 
laboured sore for to set them at accord, but it 
would not be, for that one would not minish his 
laws and accustoms, and S. Thomas would not 
grant that he should do contrary the liberties of 
holy church. And then the king of France held 
with the king of England against S. Thomas, and 
was wroth with him and commanded him to void 
his realm with all his kinsmen. And then S. 

Thomas wist not whither to go; but comforted 
his kinsmen as well as he might, and purposed to 
have gone in to Provence for to have begged his 
bread. And as he was going, the king of France 
sent for him again, and when he came he cried 
him mercy and said he had offended God and 
him, and bade him abide in his realm where he 
would, and he would pay for the dispenses of him 
and his kin. And in the meanwhile the king of 
England ordained his son king, and made him to 
be crowned by the Archbishop of York, and other 
bishops, which was against the statutes of the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



194 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life land, for the Archbishop of Canterbury should 
of S. have consented and also have crowned him, where- 
of Canter^ ^ ore Thomas gat a bull for to do accurse them 
bpjy that so did against him, and also on them that 
occupied the goods longing to him. And yet 
after this the king laboured so much that he 
accorded the king of England and S. Thomas 
which accord endured not long, for the king varied 
from it afterward. But S. Thomas, upon this 
accord, came home to Canterbury, where he was 
received worshipfully, and sent for them that had 
trespassed against him, and by the authority of the 
pope’s bull openly denounced them accursed unto 
the time they come to amendment. And when 
they knew this they came to him and would have 
made him to assoil them by. force ; and sent word 
over to the king how he had done, whereof the 
king was much wroth and said : If he had men 
in his land that loved him they would not suffer 
such a traitor in his land alive. 

And forthwith four knights took their counsel 
together and thought they would do to the king a 
pleasure, and emprised to slay S. Thomas, and 
suddenly departed and took their shipping towards 
England. And when the king knew of their 
departing he was sorry and sent after them, but 
they were on the sea and departed ere the 
messengers came, wherefore the king was heavy 
and sorry. 

These be the names of the four knights: Sir 
Reginald Fitzurse, Sir Hugh de Morvilie, Sir 
William de Tracy, Sir Richard le Breton. On 
Christmas day S. Thomas made a sermon at Canter- 
bury in his own church, and weeping, prayed the 
people to pray for him, for he knew well his time 
was nigh, and there executed the sentence on them 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*95 


that were against the right of holy church. And The Life 
that same day as the king sat at meat all the bread S. 
that he handled waxed anon mouldy and hoar, q£ 
that no man might eat of it, and the bread that 
they touched not was fair and good for to eat. 

And these four knights aforesaid came to 
Canterbury on the Tuesday in Christmas week 
about Evensong time, and came to S. Thomas 
and said that the king commanded him to make 
amends for the wrongs that he had done, and also 
that he should assoil all them that he had accursed 
anon, or else they should slay him. Then said 
Thomas: All that I ought to do by right, that 
will I with a good will do, but as to the sentence 
that is executed I may not undo, but that they 
will submit them to the correction of holy church, 
for it was done by our holy father the pope and 
not by me. Then said Sir Reginald : But if thou 
assoil the king and all other standing in the curse, 
it shall cost thee thy life. And S. Thomas said : 

Thou knowest well enough that the king and I 
were accorded on Mary Magdalene day, and 
that this curse should go forth on them that had 
offended the church. 

Then one of the knights smote him as he 
kneeled before the altar on the head. And one 
Sir Edward Grim, that was his crossier put forth 
his arm with the cross to bear off the stroke, and 
the stroke smote the cross asunder and his arm 
almost off, wherefore he fled for fear, and so did 
all the monks, that were that time at compline. 

And then smote each at him, that they smote off a 
great piece of the skull of his head, that his brain 
fell on the pavement. And so they slew and 
martyred him, and were so cruel that one of them 
brake the point of his sword against the pavement. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



196 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life And thus this holy and blessed Archbishop S. 

of S. Thomas suffered death in his own church for the 
ofCwitei> ri S ht church. And when he was 

bury’ dead they stirred his brain, and after went in to his 
chamber and took away his goods, and his horse 
out of his stable, and took away his bulls and 
writings, and delivered them to Sir Robert Broke 
to bear into France to the king. And as they 
searched his chamber they found in a chest two 
shirts of hair made full of great knots, and then 
they said: Certainly he was a good man; and 
coming down into the churchward they began to 
dread and fear that the ground would not have 
borne them, and were marvellously aghast, but 
they supposed that the earth would have swallowed 
them all quick. And then they knew that they 
had done amiss. And anon it was known all 
about, how that he was martyred, and anon after 
took this holy body, and unclothed him, and found 
bishop’s clothing above, and the habit of a monk 
under. And next his flesh he wore hard hair, 
full of knots, which was his shirt. And his 
breech was of the same, and the knots sticked fast 
within the skin, and all his body full of worms ; 
he suffered great pain. And he was thus martyred 
the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred 
and seventy-one, and was fifty-three years old. 
And soon after tidings came to the king how he 
was slain, wherefore the king took great sorrow, 
and sent to Rome for his absolution. 

Now after that S. Thomas departed from the 
pope, the pope would daily look upon the white 
chasuble that S. Thomas had said mass in, and the 
same day that he was martyred he saw it turned 
into red, whereby he knew well that that same day 
he suffered martyrdom for the right of holy church, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


197 


and commanded a mass of requiem solemnly to be The Life 
sung for his souL And when the quire began to 
sing requiem, an angel on high above began the d 
office of a martyr : Letabitur justus, and then all 
the quire followed singing forth the mass of the 
office of a martyr. And the pope thanked God 
that it pleased him to show such miracles for his 
holy martyr, at whose tomb by the merits and 
prayers of this holy martyr our blessed Lord hath 
showed many miracles. The blind have recovered 
their sight, the dumb their speech, the deaf their 
hearing, the lame their limbs, and the dead their 
life. If I should here express all the miracles 
that it hath pleased God to show for this holy 
saint it should contain a whole volume, therefore at 
this time, I pass over unto the feast of his trans- 
lation, where I propose with the grace of God to 
recite some of them. Then let; us pray to this 
glorious martyr to be our advocate, that by his 
petition we may come to everlasting bliss. Amen. 


Here followed the Life of S. Silvester . 

The interpretation of his name . 

Silvester is said of sile or sol which is light, and 
of terra the earth, as who saith the light of the 
earth, that is of the church. Or Silvester is said 
of silvas and of trahens, that is to say he was 
drawing wild men and hard unto the faith. Or as 
it is said in glossario, Silvester is to say green, that 
is to wit, green in contemplation of heavenly things, 
and a toiler in labouring himself ; he was umbrous 
or shadowous. That is to say he was cold and 
refrigate from all concupiscence of the flesh, full of 
boughs among the trees of heaven. Eusebius of 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



I9» 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life Caesarea compiled his legend, which the blessed 
rfS* Blasius in the counsel of seventy bishops recordeth, 
Silvester ^ j 8 had in the decree. 


Of the Life of S . Silvester . 

Silvester was son of one Justa and was learned 
and taught of a priest named Cyrinus, which did 
marvellously great alms and made hospitalities. It 
happed that he received a Christian man into his 
house named Timothy, who no man would receive 
for the persecution of tyrants, wherefore the said 
Timothy suffered death and passion after that year 
’whilst he preached justly the faith of Jesu Christ. 
It was so that the prefect Tarquinius supposed that 
Timothy had had great plenty of riches, which he 
demanded of Silvester, threatening him to the 
death but if he delivered them to him. And 
when he found certainly that Timothy had no 
great riches, he commanded to S. Silvester to 
make sacrifice to the idols, and if he did not he 
would make him suffer divers torments. S. 
Silvester answered: False, evil man, thou shalt 
die this night, and shalt have torments that ever 
shall endure, and thou shalt know, whether thou 
wilt or not, that he whom we worship is very God. 
Then S. Silvester was put in prison, and the 
provost went to dinner. Now it happed that as he 
ate, a bone of a fish turned in his throat and stuck 
fast, so that he could neither have it down ne up, 
and at midnight died like as S. Silvester had said, 
and then S. Silvester was delivered out of prison. 
He was so gracious that all Christian men and 
paynims loved him, for he was fair like an angel to 
look on, a fair speaker, whole of body, holy in 
work, good in counsel, patient and charitable, and 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


199 


firmly established in the faith. He had in writing 
the names of all the widows and orphans that were 
poor, and to them he administered their necessity. 
He had a custom to fast all Fridays and Saturdays. 
And it was so that Melchiades, the bishop of 
Rome, died, and all the people chose S. Silvester 
for to be the high Bishop of Rome, which sore 
against his will was made pope. He instituted 
for to be fasted Wednesday, Friday, and Satur- 
day, and the. Thursday for to be hallowed as 
Sunday. 

Now it happed that the Emperor Constantine 
did do slay all the Christian men over all where he 
could find them, and for this cause S. Silvester fled 
out of the town with his clerks and hid him in a 
mountain. And for the cruelty of Constantine 
God sent him such a sickness that he became lazar 
and measel, and by the counsel of his physicians 
he got three thousand young children for to have 
cut their throats, for to have their blood in a bath 
all hot, and thereby he might be healed of his 
measelry. And when he should ascend into his 
chariot for to go to the place where he should be 
bathed, the mothers of the children came crying 
and braying for sorrow of their children, and when 
he understood that they were mothers of the 
children, he had great pity on them and said to his 
knights and them that were about him; The 
dignity of the empire of Rome is brought forth of 
the fountain of pity, the which hath 6tablished by 
decree that who that slayeth a child in battle shall 
have his head smitten off, then should it be great 
cruelty to us for to do to ours such thing as we 
defend to strange nations, for so should cruelty sur- 
mount us. It is better that we leave cruelty and that 
pity surmount us, and therefore me seemeth better 


The Life 
of S. 
Silvester 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



200 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life to save the lives of these innocents, than by their 
of S* death I should have again my health, of the which 

Silvester we ^ not y et cer tain. Ne we may recover nothing 
for to slay them, for if so were that I should thereby 
have health, that should be a cruel health that should 
be bought with the death of so many innocents. 
Then he commanded to render and deliver again 
to the mothers their children, and gave to every 
each of them a good gift, and thus made them 
return to their houses with great joy, from whence 
they departed with great sorrow, and he himself 
returned again in his chariot unto his palace. Now 
it happed that the night after S. Peter and S. Paul 
appeared to this Emperor Constantine, saying to 
him : Because thou hast had horror to shed and 
spill the blood of innocents, our Lord Jesu Christ 
hath had pity on thee, and commandeth thee to 
send unto such a mountain where Silvester is hid 
with his clerks, and say to him that thou comest 
for to be baptized of him and thou shalt be healed 
of thy malady. And when he was awaked he did 
do call his knights and commanded them to go to 
that mountain and bring the Pope Silvester to 
him courteously and fair, for to speak with him. 
When S. Silvester saw from far the knights come 
to him, he supposed they sought him for to be 
martyred, and began to say to his clerks that they 
should be firm and stable in the faith for to suffer 
martyrdom. When the knights came to him they 
said to him much courteously that Constantine sent 
for him, and prayed him that he would come and 
speak with him. And forthwith he came, and 
when they had intersaluted each other, Constan- 
tine told to him his vision. And when Silvester 
demanded of him what men they were that so 
appeared to him, the emperor wist not ne could 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


201 


not name them. S. Silvester opened a book The Life 
wherein the images of S. Peter and S. Paul were SS,®* 
pourtrayed, and demanded of him if they were like S “ vester 
unto them. Then Constantine anon knew them, 
and said that he had seen them in his sleep. 

Then S. Silvester preached to him the faith of 
Jesu Christ, and baptized him ; and when he was 
baptized, a great light descended upon him so that 
he said that he had seen Jesu Christ, and was 
healed forthwith of his measelry. And then he 
ordained seven laws unto holy church, the first 
was that all the city should worship Jesu Christ as 
very God, the second thing was that whosoever 
should say any villainy of Jesu Christ he should be 
punished, the third, whosomever should do villainy 
to Christian men, he should lose half his goods. 

The fourth, that the bishop of Rome should be 
chief of all holy church, like as the emperor is chief 
of all the world. The fiftH, that who that had 
done or should do trespass and fled to the church, 
that he should be kept there free from all injury. 

The sixth, that no man should edify any churches 
without licence of holy church and consent of the 
bishop. The seventh, that the dime and tenth 
part of the possessions should be given to the 
church. After this the emperor came to S. 

Peter’s church and confessed meekly all his sins 
tofore all people, and what wrong he had done to 
Christian men, and made to dig and cast out to 
make the foundements for the churches, and bare 
on his shoulders twelve hods or baskets full of 
earth. When Helen, the mother of Constantine, 
dwelling in Bethany, heard say that the emperor 
was become Christian, she sent to him a letter, in 
which she praised much her son of this that he had 
renounced the false idols, but she blamed him much 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



202 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life that he had renounced the law of the Jews, and 

Silvester wor8 ^ 1 *PP ec ^ a man crucified. Then Constantine 
remanded to his mother that she should assemble 
the greatest masters of the Jews, and he should 
assemble the greatest masters of the Christian men, 
to the end that they might dispute and know which 
was the truest law. Then Helen assembled twelve 
masters which she brought with her, which were 
the wisest that they might find in that law, and S. 
Silvester and his clerks were of that other party. 
Then the emperor ordained two paynims, gentiles, 
to be their judges, of whom that one was named 
Crato, and that other Zenophilus, which were 
proved wise and expert, and they to give the 
sentence, and be judge of the disputation. Then 
began one of the masters of the Jews for to main- 
tain and dispute his law, and S. Silvester and his 
clerks answered to his disputation, and to them all, 
always concluding them by scripture. The judges 
which were true and just, held more of the party 
of S. Silvester than of the Jews. Then said one 
of the masters of the Jews named Zambry, I 
marvel, said he, that ye be so wise and incline you 
to their words, let us leave all these words and go 
we to the effect of the deeds. Then he did do 
come a cruel bull, and said a word in his ear, and 
anon the bull died. Then the people were all 
against Silvester. Then said Silvester, believe not 
thou that he hath named in the ear the name of 
Jesu Christ, but the name of some devil, know ye 
verily it is no great strength to slay a bull, for a 
man, or a lion, or a serpent may well slay him, 
but it is great virtue to raise him again to life, then 
if he may not raise him it is by the devil. And if 
he may raise him again to life, I shall believe that 
he is dead by the power of God. And when the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


203 


judges heard this, they said to Z ambry, that had 
slain the bull, that he should raise him again. Then 
he answered that if Sylvester might raise him in 
the name of Jesus of Galilee his master, then he 
would believe in him, and thereto bound them all 
the Jews that were there. And S. Silvester first 
made his orisons and prayers to our Lord, and sith 
came to the bull and said to him in his ear : Thou 
cursed creature that art entered into this bull and 
hast slain him, go out in the name of Jesu Christ, 
in whose name I command thee bull, arise thou up 
and go thou with the other beasts debonairly, and 
anon the bull arose and went forth softly. Then 
the queen and the judges, which were paynims, 
were converted to the faith. 

In this time it happed that there was at Rome a 
dragon in a pit, which every day slew with his 
breath more than three hundred men. Then came 
the bishops of the idols unto the emperor and said 
unto him: O thou most holy emperor, sith the 
time that thou hast received Christian faith the 
dragon which is in yonder foss or pit slayeth every 
day with his breath more than three hundred men. 
Then sent the emperor for S. Silvester and asked 
counsel of him of this matter. S . Silvester answered 
that by the might of God he promised to make him 
cease of his hurt and blessure of this people. Then 
S. Silvester put himself to prayer, and S. Peter 
appeared to him and said : Go surely to the dragon 
and the two priests that be with thee take in thy 
company, and when thou shalt come to him thou 
shalt say to him in this manner : Our Lord Jesu 
Christ which was born of the Virgin Mary, cruci- 
fied, buried and arose, and now sitteth on the right 
side of the Father, this is he that shall come to 
deem and judge the living and the dead, I com- 


TheLife 
of S. 
Silvester 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



204 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life mand thee Sathanas that thou abide him in this 
^ ^e come- Then thou shalt bind his 
Hermit mout ^ with a thread, and seal it with thy seal, 
wherein is the imprint of the cross. Then thou 
and the two priests shall come to me whole and 
safe, and such bread as I shall make ready for you 
ye shall eat. Thus as S. Peter had said, S. 
Silvester did. And when he came to the pit, he 
descended down one hundred and fifty steps, bear* 
ing with him two lanterns, and found the dragon, 
and said the words that S. Peter had said to him, 
and bound his mouth with the thread, and sealed 
it, and after returned, and as he came upward again 
he met with two enchanters which followed him 
for to see if he descended, which were almost dead 
of the stench of the dragon, whom he brought with 
him whole and sound, which anon were baptized, 
with a great multitude of people with them. Thus 
was the city of Rome delivered from double death, 
that was from the culture and worshipping of false 
idols, and from the venom of the dragon. At the 
last when S. Silvester approached towards his 
death, he called to him the clergy and admonished 
them to have charity, and that they should dili- 
gently govern their churches, and keep their flock 
from die wolves. And after the year of the 
incarnation of our Lord three hundred and twenty, 
he departed out of this world and slept in our 
Lord, etc. 


Here followeth the Life of S. Paul the first Hermit . 

S. Paul which was the first hermit as S. Jerome 
writeth, was in the time of Decius and Valerianus, 
emperors, the year of the incarnation of our Lord 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


205 


two hundred and fifty-six. This holy man, S. The Life 
Paul, saw men for Christian faith cruelly tormented, S. Paul 
wherefore he fled into the desert. Among whom Permit* 
he saw two cruelly tormented. The first for that 
he abode firmly in his faith, the judge did do 
anoint all his body with honey and did do bind his 
hands behind him on his back, and so did him 
be set in the heat of the sun for to be bitten and 
stung of flies and wasps ; that other that was young 
he made him to be in a right soft bed between two 
sheets, among flowers and delectable roses and 
herbs sweet smelling, and therein he was bounden 
so that he might not move him. After, he made 
an harlot, a ribald, come to him alone for to touch 
his members and his body, to move to lechery. 

Finally, when the voluptuosity of his flesh sur- 
mounted him, and he might not defend himself ne 
his members, he bit off a piece of his tongue and 
spit it in her visage, which always enticed him to 
lechery by touching and by hissings, and so he 
voided the temptation fleshly, and the ribauld also, 
and deserved to have laud and victory. In this 
time S. Paul, tofore said, was young, about sixteen 
years of age, and dwelt in Thebaid which is a part 
of Egypt, with his sister Maurice. And when be 
saw the persecutions of Christian men, he departed 
and became an hermit so long and so many years, 
that he was old one hundred and thirteen years. 

In this time S. Anthony was a hermit in another 
desert and was then ninety years of age. And on 
a time he thought in himself that in the world was 
none so good ne so great an hermit as he was 
himself. Hereupon came to him a revelation as he 
slept that, beneath all, low down in that desert was 
an hermit better than he, and that he ought to go 
and see this holy man. Anon after the next day 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



206 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life he took his staff by which he sustained him, and 
S. Paul began to go through that desert, and it happed that 
Hermit 11161 a P^ 8011 was half above, an horse, 

and beneath, a man whom the fables of the poets 
call centaurs. And anon made tofore him the sign 
of the cross, and demanded of him where this holy 
man the hermit dwelt, and he showed to him the 
way on the right ride, and anon vanished away 
from him. It is not certainly known if this beast 
was a beast of the desert or the devil in figure of a 
beast. After this, S. Anthony met with a monster 
in a valley bearing the fruit of a palm-tree crooked, 
and had in his forehead horns, and his legs and 
feet like a goat of the woods, and anon he made 
tofore him the sign of the cross. This beastial 
man gave to S. Anthony the fruit of the palm-tree, 
and S. Anthony demanded what he was, and he 
answered : I am mortal and dwell in desert, and 
the Saracens call us Sacraros. I am the messenger 
of our company, we pray thee that thou pray the 
Lord for us. We know well that the Saviour of 
the world is come, and his renown is spread 
through the world. And because hereof no man 
shall have doubtance, all men know that in the 
time of Constantine the emperor, such a man was 
brought into the city of Alexandria tofore the 
people, and when he was dead his body was filled 
with salt against the heat of the sun, and was sent 
to the emperor to Antioch for a marvel. But 
return we to our matter: S. Anthony had great 
labour in going by the desert whereas was no way. 
Finally be found a she-wolf which brought him by 
the will of God unto the hermitage of S. Paul, but 
as soon as he knew that S. Anthony came, hastily 
he shut his door. And S. Anthony prayed him 
for charity that he would open it to him, and said : 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



207 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

Thou wottest well who and wherefore I am come, The Life 
I know well I am not worthy to render and give °f S. Paul 
to thee anything for thy labour, nevertheless I shall 
not depart from hence unto the time that I have 
seen thee. At the last he opened his door, and 
sith interembraced each other, and each of them 
did reverence each to other. And S. Paul de- 
manded of the estate of the world and of the 
governance, and if Christian faith were spread and 
used over all. And whiles they were thus talking 
a crow came flying and brought to them two loaves 
of bread ; and when the crow was gone S. Paul 
said: Be thou glad and joyful, for our Lord is 
debonair and merciful, he hath sent us bread for to 
eat. It is forty years passed that every day he 
hath sent me half a joaf, but now at thy coming 
he hath sent two whole loaves, and double pro- 
vender. And they had question together until 
evensong time which of them both should entame 
or begin to take of the bread. At the last the 
bread departed even between their hands, and then 
they ate, and drank of the well or fountain. After 
graces said they had all that night collation to- 
gether. On the morn said S. Paul : Brother, it is 
long sith that I knew that thou dwelledst in this 
region and in this country, and God had promised 
to me thy company, I shall now shortly die and 
shall go to Jesu Christ for to receive the crown to 
me promised, thou art come hither for to bury 
my body. When S. Anthony heard that, anon he 
began tenderly to weep, and wailed, praying that 
he might die with him and go in his, company. 

S. Paul said : It is need yet that thou live for thy 
brethren, to the end that they by the, ensample of 
thee be made firm and taught 5 wherefore I pray 
thee return to thine abbey and bring to me the 

VOL. II. o 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



208 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. Paul 
the first 
Hermit 


mantle which Athanasius the bishop gave to thee 
for to wrap in my body. Then S. Anthony 
marvelled of this, that he knew of this bishop and 
of this mantle, and after durst nothing say, but did 
to him reverence, like as God had spoken to him, 
and weeping kissed his feet and his hands and 
came again to his abbey with great travail and 
labour, for he had from that one part to that other 
many journeys and foul way, through hayes and 
hedges, woods, stones, hills and valleys, and S. 
Anthony of great age and feeble of fasting, and not 
strong ne mighty. 

When he was come to his abbey, two of his 
disciples, to him most secret, demanded of him 
saying : Fair father, where have ye been so long ? 
And he answered: Alas! I, wretched sinner, 
which bear falsely the name to be a monk, I have 
seen Eli the prophete, I have seen John the 
Baptist in desert, and certes I have seen S. Paul 
in Paradise. Thus speaking and beating his 
breast he brought the mantle out of his cell, and 
all stilly without more words, he went again the 
long way all alone through the desert unto S. 
Paid the hermit, having great desire to see him, 
for he was afeard lest he should die ere he might 
come again to him. It happed in the second 
journey, where S. Anthony went through the 
desert the third hour of the day, he saw the soul 
of S. Paul, shining, ascend into heaven among a 
great company of angels, of prophets, and also 
of apostles, and anon he fell down to the earth 
weeping and wailing, and crying with a high voice : 
Alas, Paul ! wherefore leavest thou me so soon, 
which have so little seen thee ? Then he had so 
great desire to see the corpse or body that he 
passed all the remnant of his way as soon as a 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


209 


bird flying, like as he was wont to tell and The Life 
rehearse, and when he came to the cell of S. Paul S. . 
he found that the body was right up on his knees, Renu £ lna 
and the visage and hands addressed towards heaven, 
and supposed he had been alive and had made his 
prayers, but when he had advised it, he knew well 
that he was passed out of this world. What 
weepings and what wailings he made upon the 
body it were a piteous thing to hear ; among all 
other he said : O holy soul, thy body showeth in 
death this that thou didst in thy life. After this 
he was much abashed how he should bury the 
body, for he had no instrument to make his 
sepulchre ; then came two lions which much 
debonairly made a pit after the quantity of his 
body, and S. Anthony buried his body therein. 

And he took with him the coat of S. Paul which 
was made and fastened together with the leaves of 
a palm-tree, in manner of a mat, and afterward, 
for great reverence, S. Anthony ware this coat 
and clad him withal in great and solemn feasts. 

Thus this holy man S. Paul died in the year of 
the incarnation of our Lord two hundred and 
eighty-eight. Let us then pray to him that he 
impetre and get us remission of our sins, that after 
this life we may come to everlasting joy and bliss 
in heaven. Amen. 

Here followeth of S . Remigius , and first the interpre- 
tation of his name . 

Remigius is said of remi, that is to say feeding, 
and geos, that is earth, as who saith fettling the 
earthly people with doctrine. Or of geon, that is 
a wrestler, for he was a pastor and a wrestler, 
he fed his flock with the word of preaching, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



210 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life with suffrages of praying, and with example of 
_ conversation. There is three manner of armour 

Rewigius t j iat j g f or t j ie j e f ence> the shield, for to fight, 
the sword, for his salvation and health, the 
habergeon and helm. He wrestled against the 
devil with the shield of faith, with the sword of 
the word of God, and with the helmet of hope. 
Ignatius Archbishop of Rheims wrote his life. 

Of the Life of S . Remigius . 

Remigius, an holy doctor, and confessor glorious 
of our Lord, was tofore his birth provided of our 
Lord, and foreseen of a holy hermit. When the 
persecution of the Vandals had almost wasted and 
destroyed nigh all France, there Was a man recluse, 
holy and virtuous, which had lost his sight, which 
oft prayed to our Lord for peace and welfare of 
the church of France. He had on a time a 
vision, and him seemed an angel came to him and 
said: Know thou that the woman that thou 
knowest named Aline shall bring forth a son that 
shall be named Remigius, which shall deliver all 
the country from this persecution. And when he 
awoke he came to the house of this Aline and told 
to her his vision, and she would not believe it 
because of her age. The recluse said : It shall be 
so as I have said, and when thou hast given thy 
child suck, thou shalt give to me of thy milk, to 
put upon mine eyes, and therewith I shall be whole 
and recover my sight again. And like as he said 
all these things happened. And the woman had a 
child named Remigius, which when he came to 
the age of discretion, he fled the world, and 
entered into a reclusage. And sith after, for the 
great renown of his holy life, when he had been 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


21 1 


twenty-two years therein he was elect and chosen Tile Life 
to be Archbishop of Rheims. He was so ©f S.. 
debonair that little birds came and ate on his table Kem 4P us 
and took meat at his hand. It happed on a day 
that he was lodged in an house of a good woman 
which had but a little wine in her tonnel or vessel, 
and S. Remigius went in to the cellar and made 
the sign of the cross upon the ton, and prayed a 
while. Anon the ton was so full that it leapt over, 
by the merits of the good saint. 

Now it happed that Clodovius the king of 
France, which was a paynim, might not be con- 
verted for any preaching that his wife might do, 
which was a Christian woman, unto the time that a 
great host of Alemans came into France. Then 
by the admonishment of his wife he made a vow 
that if the God that his wife worshipped would 
give him victory, he would be baptized at his 
returning from the battle. Thus, as he demanded, 
he vanauished the battle, and after came to Rheims 
to S. Remigius and prayed him that he Would 
christen him. And when S. Remigius baptized 
him he had no chrisom ready, then a dove descended 
from heaven which brought the chrisom in an 
ampull of which the king was anointed and this 
ampull is kept in the church of S. Remigius at 
Rheims, of which the kings of France be anointed 
when they be crowned. S. Remigius had a niece 
which was married to a clerk named Genebaldus, 
which by devotion left his wife for to enter into 
religion. Then S. Remigius saw that the see of 
Rheims was over great, and ordained a see of a 
bishopric at Laon and made Genebald first bishop 
of that place. When Genebald was bishop his 
wife came thither to see him, and he remembered 
of the privity that they were wont to have together. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



212 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life and lay on a night with her, and engendered on 
her a child. When his wife knew that she was 
Remigius g reat let him have knowledge thereof, and 
when he wist that it was a son, he commanded 
that it should be named Thief, because he had 
engendered it by theft. After for to quench the 
suspicion and the words of the people, he suffered 
that his wife should come to him as she did tofore, 
and anon after she conceived a daughter, whom 
he commanded to name a fox’s whelp, and after 
came to S. Remigius and confessed him of his sin, 
and took the stole off his neck and would leave his 
bishopric, but S. Remigius, after he had confessed 
him, comforted him, and gave him penance, and 
shut him in a little cell seven years long, and gave 
to him bread and water, and in the meanwhile he 
governed the church himself. At the end of 
seven years an angel came to the prison, and said 
to him that he had done well his penance, and 
bade him go out of the prison. To whom he 
said : I may not go out, for my lord S. Remigius 
hath closed the door and sealed it. And the 
angel said to him: Know thou that the door of 
heaven is opened to thee ; I shall open this door 
without breaking of the seal which S. Remigius 
hath sealed. And anon the door was opened. 
Then Genebald fell down in the midst of the door 
in manner of a cross, and said : If our Lord Jesu 
Christ came hither I shall not go out but if S. 
Remigius, which shut and closed me herein, come 
and bring me out. And then the angel went 
anon and fetched S. Remigius and brought him to 
Laon, and he delivered him out of prison, and 
remised him and set him again in his see there, 
where he lived after, all the days of his life, holily. 
Aiter his death. Thief his son was made bishop 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


213 


after him, which is also a saint in heaven, and at The 
the last S. Remigius, after that God had shown Life rf 
many miracles for him, he departed out of this Hllar ^ 
life unto everlasting joy the year of the incarnation 
of our Lord five hundred. 

Here followetb the Life of S . Hilary* 

The interpretation of his name . 

Hilary is said of joyousness, for he was joyous 
in the service of God. Or Hilary is said virtuous 
and high, for he was high and strong in science, 
and virtuous in his life. Or Hilary is said of 
hilum, which is to say dark matter, for he had in 
his dictes great obscurity and profoundness. 

Of the Life of S. Hilary . 

S. Hilary, which was Bishop of Poictiers, was 
born in the country of Guienne. He had a wife 
wedded, and a daughter, and whereas he was in 
habit secular he lived after the life of a monk. 

He profited so much in holy life and sciences that 
he was chosen Archbishop of Poictiers. A 
manner of an heresy reigned in his country and 
throngh all France, which was the sect of the 
Arians, the which he destroyed to his power. 
Nevertheless by the commandment of the emperor, 
which was of the party of the heretics, by the 
suggestion of two bishops of that sect he was 
exiled, with which two bishops he disputed, and 
overcame them. Afterward, for they might not 
gainsay the truth of the matter, ne could not bear 
ne answer to his eloquence, so that he was con- 
strained to come again to Poictiers. And as he 
passed by an isle of the sea, which was full of 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



214 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The serpents, he chased them away by the virtue of his 
_ Frf °* comman dment, an d by his sight only, and pight a 
. ruiary gta ^p ; n t h e middle of the isle and gave to the 
serpents liberty to come to that staff and not to pass 
farther, and the serpents obeyed him, which part is 
no land now but sea. 

When S. Hilary came to Poictiers he met a 
child dead, borne for to be buried, and the child 
was not baptized ; which child by virtue of his 
prayer he raised to life, for he lay long in the dust 
in prayer, and when he arose out of his prayer the 
child arose from death to life. 

S. Hilary had a daughter named Apia and she 
would have been married, but S. Hilary preached 
to her so much of the estate of virginity that she 
changed her purpose. And when she was con- 
firmed in this will and purpose S. Hilary doubted 
that she should change, and prayed our Lord for 
to take her while she was in good purpose, and 
anon she died, and S. Hilary buried her. And 
when her mother the wife of S. Hilary saw that 
her daughter was dead, she prayed to her husband, 
that he should impetre and get for her like as he 
had done for his daughter; And anon as S. 
Hilary had made his orison, she died, and by this 
manner he sent tofore him his wife and his 
daughter. 

In this time the pope Leo, which favoured 
heresy, called a counsel of bishops, but he sent 
not for S. Hilary that he should come thereto, 
notwithstanding S. Hilary came thither. When 
the pope saw him come, he commanded that no 
man should arise against him, ne give him no 
place. Then said the pope to him : Thou art 
Hilary the cock, and not the son of an hen. 
And Hilary answered : I am Hilary and no 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


215 


cock, but a bishop in Gallia that is in France. The 
Then said the pope, Thou art Hilary Gallus, and Life of 
I am Leo of the Papal See, Judge. To whom 
Hilary said : If thou be Leo yet art thou not 
of the Tribe of Judah. Then the pope had great 
indignation and said to him : Abide thou a little, 
and I shall pay to thee thine hire ; and S. Hilary 
answered : And if thou come not again who shall 
pay me for thee? And the pope answered: I 
shall come again and shall beat down thy pride. 

Then the pope went down into the low chamber 
for to ease him, and by the conduit of his nether 
part voided out all the entrails of his body, and 
so died suddenly. Thus then as he abode the 
pope S. Hilary found no place to sit on, ne none 
would remove to make him place, and when he 
saw that, he said : Domini est terra, the earth 
longeth to our Lord, and sat down upon the 
earth, and the earth arose up by miracle by the 
will of our Lord, in such wise that he sat as high 
as the other, and anon after, word came that the 
pope was dead. Then S. Hilary confirmed all 
the other bishops that were there in the faith, 
and so confirmed, each went in to his country. 

In the end, when S. Hilary had impetred of 
God many miracles to be showed by his prayer, 
he became sick, and saw his death approach. 

Then he called to him one of his chaplains whom 
he much loved and said to him: Go thou out 
and bring to me word what thou hearest. When 
he had been long without, he came in and told 
to S. Hilary that he had heard a great noise in 
the city; and when it was midnight he sent his 
chaplain again to hearken as he had done tofore 5 
and when he came again in to the chamber for to 
tell that he had heard nothing, a great clear light 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



216 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The entered in, that the priest might not behold it. 
Invention And when the light departed S. Hilary died, 
Firmin t ^ iat wa8 Y ear gr ace three hundred and forty, 
let us pray to him that he pray for us. Amen. 


And next follovucth the Invention of S. Firmin . 

In the time of the invention of S Firmin the 
martyr, was S. Savin, bishop of Amiens, and 
saw that tofore him in the time of S. Honor, 
our Lord had done take up the bodies of S. 
Fulcian, S. Victorice, and S. Gentian, and thought 
all an whole night upon the body of S. Firmin 
the martyr. And when it was day this holy man 
S. Savin summoned the clergy and the people to 
fast and make prayers through the city of Amiens, 
to the end that our Lord would show them the 
place where the body of S. Firmin the martyr 
lay. And on the third day our Lord sent such 
a miracle that he sent a ray of the sun, which 
pierced the wall of the monastery on the same 
place where the body lay. Then they began to 
dig and delve there, and when they came nigh 
the body, there issued out so great a sweetness out 
of the pit, that all they that were there weened 
they had been in Paradise. And it seemed that 
if all the spices of the world had been stamped 
together it should not have smelled so well ne so 
sweet, and this sweet odour spread through the 
city of Amiens and divers cities about, that is to 
wit Therouanne, Cambray and Noyon. And the 
people of these cities moved them each from his 
place with candles and offerings, without sayer 
or commander, but for the odour that so spread, 
and came unto this glorious saint. And as the 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


217 


body was borne in the city of Amiens, there were 
showed such miracles that never none were like 
found ne seen tofore of any saint, for the elements 
moved them by the miracle of this saint; the 
snow that was that time great on the earth was 
turned into powder and dust by the heat that 
was then, /and the ice that hung on the trees 
became flowers and leaves, and the meadows about 
Amiens flowered and became green, and the sun 
which by his nature should go low, that day 
ascended as high as she is on S. John’s day at 
noon in the summer. And as men bare the body 
of this saint the trees inclined and worshipped 
the body, and all manner sick men, of what 
malady they had, they received health in the 
invention of the blessed body of S. Firmin. 
And the burgesses that were in their gowns and 
mantles had so great heat that they called their 
servants and bond men, of whom there were many 
that day in Amiens, and affranchised them for to 
bear their clothes into the city of Amiens. Our 
Lord did do show such miracles, and so far sent 
the odour that the lord of Beaugency which was 
at a window and was sick of lazary, smelled the 
odour and was anon guerished and whole. And 
he took his gold and came and did homage unto 
the body of S. Firmin in the city of Amiens. 
Our Lord hath showed many miracles for this 
glorious saint, and much he ought to be honoured 
in this world, and then pray we unto this blessed 
saint, S. Firmin, that he pray for us to our Lord 
that he will pardon us our sins, and octroy and 
grant to us the glory of heaven. Amen. 


Digitized by 


Google 


The 

Invention 
of S. 
Firmin 



2l8 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
Macarius 


Here followeth the Life of S. Macarius , and first 
the interpretation of his name . 

Macarius is said of macha, which is as much 
to say as engine, and of ares, which is to say 
virtue. Or Macarius is said of macha, that is 
to say smiting, and of rio, that is to say master, 
for he was ingenious against the fallacy of the 
devil, virtuous of life, smiting in chastening his 
body, and master in the governance of prelacy. 

S. Macarius was in a desert, and entered in to 
a pit or sepulchre, whereas had been buried many 
bodies of paynims, for to sleep, and he drew out 
one of these bodies and laid it under his head in- 
stead of a pillow. Then came thither devils for 
to make him aghast and afeard, and said one to 
another : Come with me to bathe thee. And 
the body that lay under his head said : I may not 
come, for I have a pilgrim upon me lying, that I 
may not move. For all this S. Macarius was 
not afeard, but he beat the body with his fist, 
and said : Arise and go if thou mayst. When 
the devils saw that they might not make him 
afeard they cried with a great voice : Macarius, 
thou hast vanquished and overcome us twice. On 
a time as Macarius was nigh his house, the devil 
came with a great scythe on his neck, and would 
have smitten therewith S. Macarius, and the devil 
said to him : Thou dost to me great violence and 
force for I may not prevail against thee. Lo ! 
what thou doest I do, thou fastest and I eat not, 
thou wakest and I never sleep, but there is one 
thing in which thou overcomest me, and Macarius 
said: What is that? To whom the devil said: 
That is humility, and thy meekness by which I 
may not prevail against thee. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


219 


It happed on a time that a great temptation 
came upon S. Macarius, and much tempted him, 
and anon he filled a sack full of stones, and laid 
it on his neck and bare it many journeys together 
through the desert. Then another hermit met 
him and demanded him why he bare so great a 
burden, and he answered : I travail my body 
because it sufFereth not me in peace, and thus I 
vex him that vexed me. This holy abbot S. 
Macarius saw passing tofore him a devil in the 
habit of a man, which was the clothing of a herald, 
all linen full of holes, and in every hole hung a 
phial, and he demanded him whither he went. 
The devil answered him, I go for to give drink 
unto these hermits, then demanded him, S. 
Macarius, wherefore he bare so many phials. 
And he answered : I shall offer to them one, 
and if he may not drink of that one, I shall 
proffer him another, and so the third, and of all 
the other, each after other, until they may find 
something pleasant to them for to fall into tempta- 
tion. And when he came again, S. Macarius 
called him, and demanded him what he had found, 
and he answered that he had evil sped, for they 
were all so holy and blessed that they recked not 
of his drink, save one only which is named Theo- 
distus. Then S. Macarius arose and came to 
these hermits, and found them all in good point 
save him whom the devil had tempted. Then 
S. Macarius did so much by his exhortation that 
he brought him again in the right way. Another 
time S. Macarius met the devil and demanded 
him whence he came, and the devil answered : 
I come from visiting thy brethren, then said S. 
Macarius : How do they ? The devil answered : 
Evil. And he asked wherefore, and the devil 


The Life 
of S. 

Macarius 


Digitized by CjOOQ 1C 



220 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life said : For they be all holy, and that worst is, there 
o[S. was one that was mine, and I have lost him, for 
Macarius j ie * g now mac j e holier than the others. When 
S. Macarius heard this he gave laudings and 
thankings to God. It happed on a time S. 
Macarius found in his way die head of a dead 
man, and he demanded of it whose head it was, 
and the head answered: Of a paynim, and 
Macarius said to him : Where is thy soul ? He 
. answered : In hell ; and he demanded if it were 
deep in hell, and he said : Deeper than is from 
heaven to earth. And after he demanded if there 
were any beneath him, and he said the Jews be 
lower than he was ; he asked if there were any 
lower or beneath the Jews; to whom he said 
that the false Christian men be yet lower and 
deeper in hell than the Jews, for as much as they 
have despited and villained the blood of Jesu 
Christ of which they were redeemed, so much 
the more be they tormented. 

On a time S. Macarius went in a desert and 
at the end of every mile he set a reed in the earth 
for to have knowledge thereby to turn again, and 
went forth nine days’ journey, and after, he slept. 
And the devil took all these reeds and bound them 
and laid them at his head, wherefore he had great 
labour for to come again into his house. An 
hermit which was in desert was much tempted for 
to go again to the world, and he thought in his 
heart that he should do more good to be among 
the people than he should do in his hermitage. 
Then he told all this to S. Macarius, and S. 
Macarius said to him : Thus shalt thou say to 
thy thoughts, that for the love of Jesu Christ I 
keep the walls of this cell. 

It happed on a time that S. Macarius killed a 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


221 


fly that bit him, and when he saw the blood of The 
this fly, he repented him, and so, repentant of Life of 
that, would revenge it, and anon unclothed him 
and went naked in the desert six months, and 
suffered himself to be bitten of the flies. After 
this S. Macarius when he had long lived, and 
God had showed many miracles for him, and had 
flowered in many virtues, he died and rendered 
his soul unto our Lord Jesu Christ, qui est 
benedictus in secula seculorum. Amen. 


Here beginneth the Life of S. Felix y said Inptncis 

Felix was surnamed Inpincis, and is said of the 
place where he resteth, or of the pointelles of 
greffes. A greffe is properly called a pointel to 
write in tables of wax, by which he suffered 
death. And some say that he was a school- 
master and taught children, and was to them much 
rigorous. After he was known of the/ paynims, 
and because he confessed plainly that he was 
Christian and believed in Jesu Christ he was de- 
livered to be tormented into the hands of the 
children his scholars, whom he had taught and 
learned, which scholars slew him with their 
pointelles, pricks, and greffes, and yet the church 
holdeth him for no martyr but for a confessor. 
And the paynims said to him that he should do 
sacrifice to the idols, but he blew on them and 
anon they fell to the earth. It is read in a legend 
that when Maximus, bishop of Nola, and Valerian, 
fled the persecution of the paynims, the bishop 
was tormented with hunger and thirst so much 
that he fell down to the ground, wherefore Felix 
was sent of an angel to him, and he bare nothing 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



222 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The with him for to give to him, and he saw by him 
Life of a cluster of raisins hanging on a tree, which he 
S. Felix ] a jd on his shoulders hastily, and bare it with 
him. And when the bishop was dead Felix was 
elected and chosen to be bishop. And as he 
preached on a time the persecutors sought him, 
and he hid him in the clefts of a broken wall, 
and incontinent by the will of God came spin- 
cops and made their work and nets before him 
that they might not find him. And when the 
tyrants could not find him they went their way, 
and he went thence and came to the house of a 
widow, and took there his refection of her three 
months, and yet he saw her never in the visage. 
And at last when the peace was made he went 
him in to his church and there died and rested 
in our Lord and was buried by the city in a place 
that was called Pincis. 

And this Felix had a brother which was in 
likewise named Felix, and when this Felix was 
constrained to adore the idols he said: Ye be 
enemies unto your gods, for if ye bring me to 
them like as my brother did, and they shall fall 
to the earth and break. 

On a time this Felix did do labour his garden 
where he had set coles and worts for his use, 
and some of his neighbours would have stolen 
away these coles and worts, and hoed in the garden 
all the night and digged, and on the morning 
S. Felix saluted them, and anon they confessed 
their sin, and he pardoned them and then they 
went their way. 

And a little while after the paynims came for to 
take S. Felix, and anon so great dolour and pain 
took them that they began to howl as dogs. And 
he said to them : Believe ye in God and say ye 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 223 

that Je8u Christ is very God, and do you to be 
baptized, and ye shall be whole, and your pain 
shall cease, and so they did, and anon they were 
all whole. And after, the bishop of the idols 
came to him and said: Sire, as soon as our God 
saw thee he fled, and when I said Why fleest thou ? 
he said : I may not suffer the virtue of Felix, and 
when my God doubteth thee, much more I ought 
to doubt thee, and when Felix had confirmed him 
in the faith he baptized him. And Felix said to 
them that adored Apollo : If Apollo be very God, 
let him say to me what I hold in my hand. And he 
had in his hand a schedule wherein was written the 
orison of our Lord, that is the Paternoster. And 
he might not answer, wherefore the paynims were 
converted to our Lord. And at last when he 
had sung his mass and the peace given to the 
people, he fell down in prayer upon the pavement 
of the church and passed out of this life unto our 
Lord. 

Here followeth the Life of S . Marcel and the inter- 
pretation of his name . 

Marcel is as much to say as denying to do evil, 
or it is said as smiting the seas, that is to say the 
adversities of the world, for the world resembleth 
the sea. For like as Chrysostom saith upon 
Matthew: Continual dread is his confuse, and 
always in the sea is continual dread, the image of 
death and perpetual disordinance without ceasing. 

Of S. MarceL 

S. Marcel was chief bishop and pope of Rome. 
He went to chastise and reprove Maximian the 

VOL. 11. p 


The Life 
of S. 
Marcel 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



224 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
Anthony 


emperor of this, that he was oyer cruel to Christian 
people. And the emperor had of him so great 
despite that he made of the house of a good 
woman, of which S. Marcel had made a church, 
the said emperor made it a stable for horses, and 
in the place where S. Marcel had sung mass, the 
emperor made him to keep his horse, in which 
service S. Marcel was all his life after, and in that 
service S. Marcel died holily the year of the in- 
carnation of our Lord two hundred and four score 
and seven. 


Here followeth of S • Anthony , and first the interpret 
tation of his name . 

Anthony is said of Ana, which is as much to 
say as high, and tenens that is holding, which is as 
much as to say as holding high things and despising 
the world. He despised the world and said : It 
is deceiving, transitory and bitter, and Athanasius 
wrote his life. 

Of the Life of S. Anthony . 

S. Anthony was born in Egypt of good and 
religious father and mother, and when he was but 
twenty years old, he heard on a time in the church 
read in the gospel, that said: If thou wilt be 
perfect go sell all that thou hast and give it to 
poor men ; and then according thereto he sold all 
that he had, and gave it to the poor people and 
became an hermit. He had overmany temptations 
of the devil. Then on a time when he had over- 
come the spirit of fornication which tempted him 
therein by the virtue of his faith, the devil came to 
him in the form of a little child all black, and fell 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


225 


down at his feet and confessed that he was the The Life 
devil of fornication, which S. Anthony had desired S. 
and prayed to see him, for to know him that so A^ony 
tempted young people. Then said S. Anthony: 

Sith I have perceived that thou art so foul a thing 
I shall never doubt thee. 

After, he went into a hole or cave to hide him, 
and anon he found there a great multitude of devils, 
that so much beat him that his servant bare him 
upon his shoulders in to his house as he had been 
dead. When the other hermits were assembled 
and wept his death, and would have done his 
service, suddenly S. Anthony revived and made 
his servant to bear him into the pit again where 
the devils had so evil beaten him, and began to 
summon the devils again, which had beaten him, 
to battles. And anon they came in form of divers 
beasts wild and savage, of whom that one howled, 
another siffled, and another cried, and another 
brayed and assailed S. Anthony, that one with 
the horns, the others with their teeth, and the 
others with their paws and ongles, and disturned, 
and all torrent his body that he supposed well to die. 

Then came a clear brightness, and all the beasts 
fled away, and S. Anthony understood that in this 
great light our Lord came, and he said twice : 

Who art thou ? The good Jesu answered : I am 
here, Anthony. Then said S. Anthony : O good 
Jesu! where hast thou been so long? why wert 
thou not here with me at the beginning to help me 
and to heal my wounds ? Then our Lord eaid : 

I was here but I would see and abide to see thy 
battle, and because thou hast manly fought and 
well maintained thy battle, I shall make thy name 
to be spread through all the world. S. Anthony 
was of so great fervour and burning love to God, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



226 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life that when Maximus, the emperor, slew and martyred 
S. Christian men, he followed the martyrs that he 
Anthony m jgh t ^ a mar tyr with them and deserve it, and 
was sorry that martyrdom was not given to him. 

After this, as S. Anthony went in desert he 
found a platter of silver in his way; then he thought 
whence this platter should come, seeing it was in 
no way for any man to pass, and also if it had 
fallen from any man he should have heard it sound 
in the falling. Then said he well that the devil 
had laid it there for to tempt him, and said : Ha ! 
devil, thou weenest to tempt me and deceive me, 
but it shall not be in thy power. Then the platter 
vanished away as a little smoke. And in likewise 
it happed him of a mass of gold that he found in 
this way, which the devil had cast for to deceive 
him, which he took and cast it into the fire and 
anon it vanished away. After, it happed that S. 
Anthony on a time was in prayer, and saw in a 
vision all the world full of snares and gins. 
Then cried S. Anthony and said : O good Lord, 
who may escape from these snares ? And a voice 
said to him : Very humility shall escape them 
without more. 

When S. Anthony on a time was left in the 
air, the devils came against him and laid to him 
all the evils that he had done from his childhood, 
tofore the angels. Then said the angels: Thou 
oughtest not to tell the evils that have been de- 
feated, but say if thou know any evil sith he was 
made a monk, then the devils contrived many 
evils, and when they might not prove them, the 
angels bare him higher than tofore, and after set 
him again in his place. S. Anthony recordeth of 
himself that he had seen a man so great and so 
high that he vaunted himself to be the virtue and 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


227 


the providence of God, and 6aid to me : Demand The Life 
of me what thou wilt and I shall give it to thee. of S. 
And I spit in the midst of his visage, and anon I An “ 10n y 
armed me with the sign of the cross, and ran upon 
him, and anon he vanished away. And after this 
the devil appeared to him in so great a stature that 
he touched the heaven, and when S. Anthony had 
demanded him what he was, he answered : I am 
the devil and demand thee why these monks and 
these cursed Christian men do me thus much 
shame ? S. Anthony said : They do it by good 
right, for thou dost to them the worst thou canst, 
and the devil answered : I do to them none harm, 
but they trouble each other, I am destroyed and 
come to naught because that Jesu Christ reigneth 
over all. 

A young man passed by S. Anthony and his 
bow in his hand, and beheld how S. Anthony 
played with his fellows, and was evil apaid. Then 
S. Anthony said to him that he should bend his 
bow, and so he did, and shot two or three shots 
tofore him, and anon he unbent his bow. Then 
demanded him S. Anthony why he held not 
his bow bent. And he answered that it should 
then be over weak and feeble ; then said to him 
S. Anthony : In likewise play the monks, for to be 
after more strong to serve God. 

A man demanded of S. Anthony what he might 
do to please God, and he answered : Over all 
where thou shalt be or shalt go, have God tofore 
thine eyes, and the holy scripture, and hold thee 
in one place all still, and walk not ne royle not 
about in the country, do these three things and 
thou shalt be safe. 

An abbot came to S. Anthony for to be 
counselled of him what he might do for to be 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



228 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life saved. S. Anthony answered to him : Have none 
of S. affiance in the good that thou hast done, ne that 
Anthony t [ 10u fc as t kept thy belly and thy tongue well 
soberly, and repent thee not of penance that thou 
hast done I say, for like as fishes that have been 
long in the water when they come in to dry land 
they must die, in like wise the monks that go out 
of their cloister or cells, if they converse long with 
seculars they must needs lose their holiness and 
leave their good life. It behoveth the monks that 
they be solitary, and that they have three battles, 
that is of hearing, of speaking, and of seeing, and 
if they have but one of these batdes, that is of the 
heart, yet they have overmuch. 

Some hermits came to S. Anthony for to visit 
him, and their abbot was with them ; then said 
S. Anthony to the hermits : Ye have a good wise 
man with you, and after he said to the abbot : 
Thou hast founden good brethren. Then an- 
swered the abbot: Truly I have good brethren, 
but there is no door on their house, each body 
may enter that will, and go into the stable and 
unbind the ass of within. And this said he 
because that the brethren had overmuch their 
mouths open to speak, for anon as they have 
thought on a thing is it come to the mouth. 
Then S. Anthony said : Ye ought to know that 
there be three bodily movings, that one is of 
nature, another of overmuch plenty of meats, and 
the third of the devil. 

There was an hermit that had renounced the 
world, but not perfectly, for he had somewhat 
proper to himself, whom S. Anthony sent to the 
market to buy flesh, and as he was coming and 
brought the flesh, the dogs assailed him, and all to- 
tare him, and took the flesh from him ; and when 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


229 


he came to S. Anthony he told him what was The Life 
happed to him 5 and then said S. Anthony to him : 

Thus as the hounds have done to thee, so do the U10n ^ 
devils to monks that keep money and have some 
proper to themselves. 

On a time as S. Anthony was in the wilderness 
in his prayer and was weary, he said to our Lord, 

Lord, I have great desire to be saved, but my 
thoughts let me. Then appeared an angel to him 
and said : Do as I do, and thou shalt be safe, and 
he went out and saw him one while labour and 
another while pray, do thus and thou shalt be saved. 

On a time when the brethren hermits were 


assembled tofore S. Anthony, they demanded of 
him of the state of souls when they be departed 
from the body, and the next night after a voice 
called S. Anthony and said: Arise, and go 
out and see up on high. When S. Anthony 
beheld upward on high he saw one long and 
terrible, whose head touched the clouds, which 
kept people having wings that would have fled to 
heaven, and this great man retained and caught 
some, and others he might not retain ne let for they 
flew forth up. Then he heard a noise full of joy, 
and another full of sorrow, and he understood that 
this was the devil that retained some souls that 


went not to heaven, and the other he might not 
hold ne retain, wherefore he made sorrow, and for 
the other he made joy, and so iie heard the sorrow 
and the joy meddled together. 

It happed on a time that S. Anthony laboured 
with his brethren the hermits, and he saw a vision 
much sorrowful, and therefore he kneeled down 
on his knees and prayed our Lord that he would 
empesh the great sorrow that was to come. Then 
the other hermits demanded what thing it was, and 


Digitized by Google 



230 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life he said that it was a great sorrow, for I have seen 
of S. great plenty of beasts which environed me, which 
Anthony f eare( j a ]} the country, and I wot well that this is 
to say that there shall come a great trouble of men 
like unto beasts, that shall defoul the sacraments 
of holy church. Then came a voice from heaven 
to S. Anthony that said that great abomination 
shall come to mine altar. And anon after, the 
heresy of Arius began, and much troubled holy 
church, and did many evils. They beat monks 
and other all naked tofore the people, and slew 
Christian men like sheep upon the altars, and in 
especial one Balachyn did great persecution to 
whom S. Anthony wrote a letter which said : I 
see the ire and mal talent of our Lord coming 
upon thee if thou suffer not the Christians to live 
in peace. Then I command thee that thou do to 
them no more villainy or thou shalt have a mis- 
chance hastily. The unhappy man received this 
letter and began to mock S. Anthony, and spit 
on it, and beat well him that brought the letter, 
and sent again to S. Anthony these words: If 
thou hast so great charge of thy monks come to 
me and I shall give to thee my discipline : but it 
happed that the fifteenth day after he mounted 
upon a horse over debonair, and nevertheless when 
the horse felt him upon him he bit him on the 
legs and thighs that he died on the third day. 

It happed another time that the hermits were 
come to S. Anthony and demanded of him a 
collation. Then said S. Anthony : Do ye this 
that is written in the gospel, if one give to the 
other a stroke on that one cheek show him that 
other ? And they made answer : We may not do 
so ; then said he : Suffer ye it once debonairly ; they 
answered : We may not. Then said S. Anthony 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


231 


to his servant : Give them to drink good wine, 
for these monks be over delicious. Fair brethren, 
put yourselves to prayer, for ye have much great 
need. At the last S. Anthony assembled the 
hermits and gave to them the peace, and died 
and departed out of this world holily when he was 
of the age of an hundred and five years. Pray we 
to him that he pray for us. 


Of S . Fabian , and the interpretation of his name first. 

Fabian is as much to say as making sovereign 
beatitude or blessedness, that is to wit in getting 
in three manner wises or manners. First by right 
and reason of adoption of being in achate, and by 
victory. 

Of $. Fabtan the Martyr • 

S. F abian was a citizen and burgess of Rome, 
and it happed when the pope was dead that the 
people assembled for to choose another pope. 
And S. Fabian came to the election for to know 
who should be elect and chosen to that dignity. 
And anon a white dove descended from heaven 
and rested upon his head, and when the people 
saw that they marvelled much, and all they by 
common accord chose him for to be pope. 
This holy man Fabian, after when he was pope, 
he ordained throughout all the countries, seven 
deacons, and to them seven subdeacons, for to 
write the lives of martyrs. 

There was an emperor in his time named 
Philip, which was much sinful, and came boldly 
in the vigil of Easter in to the church for to be 
houseled and communed, whom the pope drove 


The Life 
of S. 
Fabian 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



2 3 2 THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life away and denied to him the communion, until he 
had gone and shriven him of his sins, and let him 
e an stand among the seculars. This holy pope also 
ordained the chrism in the church* Then at the 
last when he had been pope thirteen years Decius 
the emperor commanded to smite off his head, and 
so he was crowned with the crown of martyrdom 
the year of our Lord two hundred and fifty-three. 


Of S . Sebastian , and first the Interpretation 
of his name . 

Sebastian is said of sequens and beatitudo, and 
astim and ana, that is to say following the blessed- 
ness of the heavenly city, and this he gat five 
manner wises, after S. Austin, that is to say he 
gat by poverty the kingdom, with sorrow joy, with 
labour rest, with trouble glory, and with death 
life. Or Sebastianus is said of basto, for by the 
help of Christ he flourished in the church, and 
had a custom to comfort the martyrs in their 
torments. 


Of S. Sebastian . 

S. Sebastian was a man of great faith, a good 
Christian man, and was born in Narbonne, and 
after taught and endoctrined in the city of Milan, 
and was so well beloved of Diocletian and 
Maximian, emperors of Rome, that they made 
him master and duke of their meiny and power, 
and always would have him in their presence. 
And he was always with them in habit of a 
knight, and was girded with a girdle of gold 
above like as was used. And all this did he not 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


233 


for jollity, ne for cause that he dreaded death, or The Life 
to die for the love of Jesu Christ, but he did it for % 

to comfort the Christian men in their belief when Sebastian 
they were in distress for to reny the faith for 
dread of tormenting their body. 

It happed that two brethren german, very 
Christian men and noble of lineage named Marcus 
and Marcellianus, were taken and constrained by 
the emperor for to worship and do sacrifice unto 
the idols, and there was given to them thirty days 
to be in prison without to receive death for their 
Christian faith, within which time they might 
counsel and advise themselves whether they would 
do sacrifice to the idols or to leave, and their 
friends were suffered in this time of respite to 
come to them in prison, for to entreat and revoke 
them from their faith for to save their lives. 

Then came their parents and friends to them, and 
began to say: Whence cometh this hardness of 
heart that ye despise the old age of your father 
and mother which be now old? Ye get unto 
them new sorrows, the great pain that they had 
in your birth was not *0 great as the sorrow that 
they have now, and the sorrow that your mother 
suffereth is not to rehearse, wherefore right dear 
friends we pray you that ye will to these sorrows 
put some remedy, and depart you and leave the 
error of the Christian men. And anon, after these 
words, their mother came, and entered in, in crying 
and tearing the hair of her head and in showing 
her paps, and said all weeping : Alas ! I am 
mechant and unhappy that lose my two sons that 
I have given suck and nourished so sweetly; thou 
fair son, thou wert sweet and debonair to me. 

And to that other she said : Thou wert like and 
semblest well thy father. Alas ! to what mischief 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



234 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life and sorrow am I delivered for you my fair sons ; 

of S. I lose my sons which by their own will go for to 
Sebastian My most dear children, have ye mercy on 
your sorrowful mother, that am in so great misease 
and in so great weepings for you ; O poor caitiff 
that I am, what shall I do that lose my two sons ? 
and to the death I see them go by their free will. 
Alas ! this is a new manner of death, for to desire 
the death tofore it come. The mother had unnethe 
said her complaint but that their father was brought 
between two servants, which at the entry showed 
to his sons dust upon the poverty of his hoar head 
and 'cried : Alas I sorrowful caitiff come to the 
death of my two sons, which by their own agree- 
ment will die. O my over dearest sons that were 
the sustenance and staff of mine old age, sweetly 
nourished and taught and learned in science, what 
is this open foolishness and rage that is come on 
you and causeth you to love and desire so the 
death? There was never such a folly ne rage 
seen in the world. O ye my friends come forth 
and help me to beweep my children, ye that have 
hearts of pity, and ye old and young, weep ye, and 
I will weep so much that I see not the death of 
my sons. In the while that the father thus wept 
and said, came the two wives of these two sons, 
which bare in their arms their children, which 
weeping and crying said : Say ye now that be our 
dear husbands, in what ward leave ye us and your 
children! Alas, what shall become of us, our 
children, and our goods, that for your sake shall 
be lost ? Alas caitiffs that we be, what thing is 
to us happened? how have ye hearts of iron? in 
what manner may ye so be hardened, so out of 
nature, and so cruel, that also despise your father 
and mother and refuse all your friends, chase away 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


235 


your wives, and reny and forsake your children, 
and with your will deliver yourselves for to die 
shamefully? Of these lamentable words tofore 
written, the two said sons Marcus and Marcellianus 
were so abashed and their hearts mollified, that 
almost they were returned from the Christian faith, 
and would for the favour of their parents and 
friends have done sacrifice unto the idols. But at 
these words was S. Sebastian as a knight ; when he 
saw them thus travailed, and so amoliished anon 
came to them and said : O right noble knights of 
Jesu Christ, wise and hardy, which be come to the 
victory and now go aback, and for a few blandish- 
ing words vain and miserable, ye will lose the 
victory permanable, lose ye not the everlasting life 
for the blandishing words of women, be ye example 
to other Christian men for to be strong in the faith, 
address ye your hearts above the world, and lose 
ye not your crown for the weepings of your wives 
and your children. They that now weep, certes 
should this day be glad and joyous if they knew 
that ye know. They ween that there be none 
other life but this which they see tofore their eyes, 
which after this shall come to nought: if they knew 
what is that other life without death and without 
heaviness, in which is joy permanable and everlast- 
ing, without doubt they would haste them for to go 
with you unto that life and should repute this life as 
vain. For it is full of misery and also false, and 
sith the beginning of the world hath deceived all 
his friends and conquered all them that have affiance 
in him, for she hath lied in her promise, yet doth 
she daily in this life more harm, for she maketh 
gluttons, and other she maketh lecherous, she 
maketh thieves for to slay, and the angry cruel, 
and the liars false and deceivable; she putteth 


Digitized by 


Google 


The Life 
of S. 

Sebastian 



236 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life discord among wedded and married people, and 
°£S. debate among the peaceable, by the world cometh 
Sebastian ma ij ce anc [ also felony. This evil do they 
that in this life put their desires and ween long 
to live therein, and when they that thus serve the 
world have used their life in doing this evil afore- 
said, then giveth she to them her daughter, that is 
the death perpetual ; that is the reward that the 
life of this world giveth to her servants that depart 
from this world dispurveyed, and bear nothing 
with them but their sins. After this S. Sebastian 
turned him to their parents and friends and said 
to them in this manner : O ye my friends, lo, here 
the life of this world which deceiveth you in such 
wise that ye discounsel your friends from the 
everlasting life, ye distrouble your children that 
they should not come to the company of heaven, 
and to the honour permanable and to the amity of 
the emperor celestial, by your foolish words and 
your false weepings ; if they should assent to your 
repeal, they should but a while dwell with you, 
and after should depart from your company where 
ye should see them in torments that should never 
end, whereas cruel flame devoureth the souls of 
miscreants and worshippers of idols, and the 
dragons eat the lips of cursed men, and the 
serpents destroy them that be evil 5 there where 
is heard nothing but wailings, weepings, and 
horrible cries of souls which burn continually 
in the fire of hell, and ever shall burn without 
dying. Suffer ye that your sons escape these 
torments, and think how ye may escape and let 
them suffer death for the love of Jesu Christ. 
Think not but they, when they shall be thus de- 
parted from you, go for to make ready your place 
and your mansion in heaven, where ye and your 

Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 237 

children may be in joy perpetual. In this hour The Life 
and time that S. Sebastian, that was in habit of a . 
knight clad with a mantle and girt with a girdle Sebastian 
of gold, and had said these words, anon came a 
great light, in the which appeared a youngling 
clad with a white mantle among seven angels, and 
gave to S. Sebastian the peace saying: Thou 
shalt be alway with me. This saw the wife of 
Nicostratus named Zoe in whose house Marcus 
and Marcellianus were in prison, which had been 
mute and dumb six years by a sickness that she 
had ; but she had understood that ' which S. 

Sebastian had said and had seen the light about 
him, and she fell down to his feet, and by signs of 
her hands made prayers to him. And after when 
S. Sebastian knew that she had lost her speech, 
anon he said to her : If I be the servant of Jesu 
Christ and if all that I have said be true, then I 
pray him that he will render to thee thy speech 
again that opened the mouth of Zacharias the 
prophet. And anon escried this woman much 
high, and said : The word that thou hast said is 
very true, and blessed be thou and the word of 
thy mouth, and blessed be all they that by thee 
believe in Jesu Christ the son of God, for I have 
seen certainly seven angels tofore thee holding a 
book, in which was written all that which thou 
hast said, and cursed be they that believe thee 
not. And Nicostratus husband of this woman, 
and the father and mother, and all the friends of 
Marcellianus and Marcus received the Christian 
faith and were all baptized by Polycarpus the 
priest unto the number of seventy-eight persons, 
men, women, and children. And ten days during 
they abode together in orisons and prayers, and 
thanked God of his benefits. Among them was 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 





THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
Sebastian 


Tranquillinus, father unto the holy martyrs afore- 
said, which had, eleven years during, the gout in 
his feet and hands, and as soon as Polycarp had 
baptized him he became as whole and sound in 
his feet and hands as a child. After the ten days, 
Agrestin and Chromatius, provosts of Rome, made 
Tranquillinus their father to come tofore them, and 
demanded of him how his sons were advised and 
counselled, and he answered : Much well did ye 
when ye gave to them respite, for in the meantime 
they that should have died have found life and joy. 
And the provost supposed that his sons had been 
turned, and said : To-mora I shall see how thy 
sons shall make sacrifice to the idols, by whom 
thou and they may dwell in peace. And 
Tranquillinus said : Gentle man, if thou wilt 
justly adore and work about me and my sons thou 
shalt find that the name of Christian men is of 
great virtue. And the provost said : Tranquillinus, 
art thou wood ? And he answered : I have been 
out of my wit, but as soon as I believed in Jesu 
Christ I received health of body and of soul. 
The provost said : I see well that the respite of 
thy sons hath brought thee in error. Tranquillinus 
said : Know you of what works come error ? 
The provost bade him say, and he said : The first 
error is to leave the way of life and go by the way 
of death for to dispute that men which be dead 
for to be gods, and to adore their images, made of 
wood or of stone. The provost said : Then they 
be no gods that we adore r Tranquillinus said : It 
is read in our books what men they were that ye 
adore for gods, how evil they lived, and how 
mechantly they died. Saturnus whom ye worship 
for god was lord of Crete, and ate the flesh of his 
children, how ? is not he one of your gods? And 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


239 


Jupiter his son, whom ye adore, which slew his The Life 
father, and took his sister to his wife, what evil .. 
was this ? how art thou in great error that adorest *** 

this cursed man, and sayest to the image of stone : 

Thou art my god, and to the stock of tree : Help 
me. The proyost said : If there be none but one 
God invisible that ye adore, wherefore then adore 
ye Jesu Christ whom the Jews crucified ? Tran- 
quillinus answered : If thou knewest of a ring of 
gold in which were a precious stone, lying in the 
mire of a valley, thou wouldst send thy servants 
for to take up this ring and if they might not lift 
it up, thou wouldst unclothe thyself of thy clothes 
of silk and do on a coarse coat and wouldst help 
to take up this ring and make a great feast. The 
provost said : Wherefore hast thou put forth this 
proposition now? Tranquillinus answered: For 
to show to thee that we adore one only God. 

The provost said : What understandest thou by 
this ring? Tranquillinus said, the gold of the 
ring is the body human, and the precious stone 
signifieth the soul which is enclosed in the body, 
the body and the soul make, a man, like as the 
gold and the precious stone make a ring, and much 
more precious is the man to Jesu Christ than the 
ring is to thee. Thou sendest thy servants for to 
take up this ring out of the dirt or mire, and they 
may not. Thus sent God into this world the 
prophets for to draw the human lineage out of the 
ordure of sins, and they might not do it. And 
like as thou shouldst leave thy rich clothes and 
clothe thee with a coarse coat, and wouldst descend 
into the privy, and put thy hands into foul 
ordure to take up the ring, right so the majesty of 
God hid the light of his divinity by a carnal vest- 
ment, which he took of our nature human, and 

VOL. II. Q 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



240 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life clad him therewith and descended from heaven, 
of .S- and came here beneath into the privy of this world, 
Sebastian p Ut jjj g hands in the ordure of our miseries in 
suffering hunger and thirst, and took us up out of 
the filth and washed us from our sins by the water 
of baptism. And thus he which despiseth thee 
because thou shouldst descend in a foul habit to 
take up the ring, thou mightest well put him to 
death. Thus all they that reny or despise Jesu 
Christ because he humbled himself for to save man, 
may in no wise escape from the death of hell. The 
provost said : I see well that these be but fables ; 
thou hast taken respite for thy sons, knowest thou 
not well that the emperor our lord is cruel against 
Christian men ? Tranquillinus said : It is folly to 
doubt more human puissance than the puissance 
divine, they that be cruel against us may well 
torment our bodies but they may not take from 
our heart Jesu Christ. Then the provost put 
Tranquillinus in the hands of the sergeants saying : 
Show to me the medicine by which thou art healed 
of thy gout, and I shall give to thee gold without 
number. Tranquillinus said: Know thou that much 
evil shall come to them that sell and buy the grace 
of God, but if thou wilt be whole of the malady of 
the gout, believe in Jesu Christ and thou shalt be 
whole as I am. The provost said : Bring him to 
me that hath healed thee. Tranquillinus went to 
Polycarp and said to him all this, and brought 
him with S. Sebastian unto the provost and in* 
formed him in the faith, and he prayed them that 
he might have his health, and S. Sebastian said 
that he should first reny his idols and give him 
licence to break them, and then he should have his 
health. Then Chromatius the provost said that his 
servants should break them. S. Sebastian said : 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


241 


They be afeared and dare not break them, and if The Life 
the fiends hurt any of them by any occasion, the 
misbelievers would say that they were hurt because a 
they brake their gods. And then Polycarp and 
S. Sebastian destroyed more than two hundred 
idols. Then said they to the provost : Why hast 
thou not received the health whilst we brake the 
idols ? Thou keepest yet thy misbelief or else 
keepest yet some idols. Then he showed them 
a chamber which was light as had been of stars, 
whereupon his father had dispended two hundred 
pois of gold, by which he knew things for to come. 

Then said S. Sebastian : As long as thou keepest 
this whole thou mayst never have health, and then 
he agreed it should be broken. Tiburtius, his son, 
which was a noble young man, said plainly that so 
noble a work should not be destroyed : How well I 
will not be against my father’s health, this will I 
well, that there be ordained two furnaces of fire 
burning, and then I will that ye destroy this work, 
and if my father have his health I shall be content, 
and if he receive not his health, then I will that ye 
two shall be burnt in these two furnaces of fire all 
quick. And S. Sebastian said: Be it as thou 
hast said : And forthwith they went and brake the 
chamber. And in the meanwhile the angel of our 
Lord appeared to the provost and said his health 
was given to him, and anon he was all whole, and 
ran after him for to have kissed his feet, but he 
denied him for he had not received baptism. And 
then he and Tiburtius his son with one thousand 
four hundred of their family were baptized. Then 
Zoe was taken of the miscreants and tormented 
so long that she gave up the spirit. And when 
Tranquillinus heard that, he came forth and said: 

Alas ! why live we so long ? Women go tofore 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



242 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
Sebastian 


us to the crown of martyrdom ; and within a few 
days after he was stoned to death. And Tiburtius 
was commanded that he should go barefoot upon 
burning coals or else do sacrifice to the idols, and 
then he made the sign of the cross upon the coals 
and went on them barefoot, and he said: Me- 
thinketh I go upon rose flowers in the name of 
our Lord Jesu Christ. To whom Fabian the 
provost said : It is not unknown to us that your 
Jesu Christ is a teacher of sorcery. To whom 
Tiburtius said : Hold thy peace thou cursed wretch, 
for thou art not worthy to name so worthy, so holy 
ne so sweet a name. Then the provost was wroth 
and commanded to smite off his head, and so he 
was martyred. And then Mafcellianus and Marcus 
were sore tormented and bound to a pillar, and as 
they were so bound they said : Lo ! how good 
and joyful it is brethren to dwell together. To 
whom the provost said: Ye wretches, do away 
your madness and deliver yourselves, and they said : 
We were never so well fed, we would that thou 
wouldest let us stand here till that the spirits should 
depart out of our bodies. And then the provost 
commanded that they should be pierced through 
the body with spears, and so they fulfilled their 
martyrdom. After this S. Sebastian was acccused 
to the emperor that he was Christian, wherefore 
Diocletian, the emperor of Rome, made him come 
tofore him, and said to him ; I have always loved 
thee well, and have made thee master of my 
palace ; how then hast thou been Christian privily 
against my health, and in despite of our gods ? S. 
Sebastian said : Always I have worshipped Jesu 
Christ for thy health and for the state of Rome, 
and I think for to pray and demand help of the 
idols of stone is a great folly. With these words 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


243 


Diocletian was much angry and wroth, and com- 
manded him to be led to the field and there to be 
bounden to a stake for to be shot at. And the 
archers shot at him till he was as full of arrows as an 
urchin is full of pricks, and thus left him there for 
dead. The night after came a Christian woman 
for to take his body and to bury it, but she found 
him alive and brought him to her house, and took 
charge of him till he was all whole. Many 
Christian men came to him which counselled him 
to void the place, but he was comforted and stood 
upon a step where the emperor should pass by, and 
said to him : The bishops of the idols deceive you 
evilly which accuse the Christian men to be con- 
trary to the common profit of the city, that pray 
for your estate and for the health of Rome 
Diocletian said : Art thou not Sebastian whom we 
commanded to be shot to death. AndS. Sebastian 
said: Therefore our Lord hath rendered to me 
life to the end that I should tell you that evilly 
and cruelly ye do persecutions unto Christian men. 
Then Diocletian made him to be brought into 
prison into his palace, and to beat him so sore with 
stones dll he died. And the tyrants threw his body 
into a great privy, because the Christian men should 
make no feast to bury his body, ne of his martyr- 
dom. But S. Sebastian appeared after to S. Lucy, 
a glorious widow, and said to her : In such a privy 
shalt thou find my body hanging at an hook, which is 
not defouled with none ordure, when thou hast 
washed it thou shalt bury it at the catacombs by the 
apostles. And the same night she and her servants 
accomplished all that Sebastian had commanded 
her. He was martyred the year of our Lord two 
hundred and eighty seven. 

And S. Gregory telleth in the first book oi his 


Th* Life 
of S. 

Sebastian 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



244 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life Dialogues that a woman of Tuscany which was new 
wedded was prayed for to go with other women to 
M&astxan the dedication of the church of Sebastian, and the 
night tofore she was so moved in her flesh that she 
might not abstain from her husband, and on the 
morn, she having greater shame of men than of 
God, went thither, and anon as she was entered 
into the oratory where the relics of S. Sebastian 
were, the fiend took her and tormented her before 
all the people. And then the priest took the 
coverture of the altar and covered her, and then 
the devil assailed the priest. Her friends led her 
to the enchanters that they should enchant the 
fiend, but as soon as they began the enchantment, 
by the judgment of God a legion of devils entered 
into her, that is six thousand six hundred and sixty- 
six, and vexed her more sharply than tofore, and 
an holy man named Fortunatus by his prayers 
healed her. It is read in the gestes of the 
Lombards that, in the time of King Gumbert all 
Italy was smitten with so great a pestilence that 
unnethe they that were alive might bury the dead, 
and this pestilence was most at Rome and Pavia. 
Then the good angel was seen visibly of many, 
and an evil angel following bearing a staff whom he 
bade smite and slay, and as many strokes as he 
smote an house, so many dead persons were borne 
out of it. Then at last it was shewed to one by 
God’s grace that this pestilence should not cease 
till that they had made an altar to S. Sebastian 
at Pavia, which then was made in the church of 
S. Peter, and anon the pestilence ceased, and 
thither from Rome relics of S. Sebastian were 
brought. And S. Ambrose in his preface saith 
thus: O Lord, the blood of thy blessed martyr S. 
Sebastian was shed for the confession of thy name. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 24$ 

he hath showed thy marvels that they profit in 
infirmity virtue, and giveth to our studies profit, 
and to them not steadfast to thee it giveth aid and 
help. Then let us pray to this holy martyr S. 
Sebastian that he pray unto our Lord that we may 
be delivered from all pestilence and from sudden 
death, and so depart advisedly hence, that we may 
come to everlasting joy and glory in heaven. 


And next follow eth of S. Agnes ^ and first the 
interpretation of her name . 

Agnes is said of agna a lamb, for she was 
humblfe and debonair as a lamb, or of agnos in 
Greek, which is to say debonair and piteous, for 
she was debonair and merciful. Or Agnes of 
agnoscendo, for she knew the way of truth, and 
after this S. Austin saith, truth is opposed against 
vanity, falseness, and doubleness, for these three 
things were taken from her for the truth that she 
had. 


Of S. Agnes . 

The blessed virgin S. Agnes was much wise, 
and well taught, as S. Ambrose witnesseth, and 
wrote her passion. She was fair of visage, but much 
fairer in the Christian faith, she was young of age, 
and aged in wit, for in the thirteenth year of her 
age she lost the death that the world giveth, and 
found life in Jesu Christ, which when she came 
from school the son of the prefect of Rome, for the 
emperor, loved her, and when his father and mother 
knew it, they offered to give much riches with 
him if he might have her in marriage, and offered 


The 
Life of 
S. Agnes 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The to S. Agnes precious gems and jewels, which she 
Life of refused to take, whereof it happed that the young 
S. Agnes man wa8 ar dently esprised in the love of S. Agnes, 
and came again and took with him more precious and 
richer adornments, made with all manner of precious 
stones, and as well by his parents as by himself 
offered to S. Agnes rich gifts and possessions, and 
all the delights and deduits of the world, and all 
to the end to have her in marriage. But S. 
Agnes answered to him in this matter : Go from 
me thou fardel of sin, nourishing of evils and 
morsel of death, and depart, and know thou that I 
am prevented and am loved of another lover, 
which hath given to me many better jewels, which 
hath fianced me by his faith, and is much more 
noble of lineage than thou art, and of estate. He 
hath clad me with precious stones and with jewels 
of gold, he hath set in my visage a sign that I 
receive none other espouse but him, and hath 
showed me over-great treasures which he must 
give me if I abide with him. I will have none 
other spouse but him, I will seek none other, in 
no manner may I leave him, with him am I firm 
and fastened in love, which is more noble, more 
puissant and fairer than any other, whose love is 
much sweet and gracious, of whom the chamber is 
now for to receive me where the virgins sing 
merrily. I am now embraced of him of whom 
the mother is a virgin, and his father knew never 
woman, to whom the angels serve. The sun and 
the moon marvel them of his beauty, whose works 
never fail, whose riches never minish, by whose 
odour dead men rise again to life, by whose 
touching the sick men be comforted, whose love is 
chastity. To him I have given my faith, to him 
I have commanded my heart 5 when I love him 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


247 


then am I chaste, and when I touch him then am The _ 

I pure and clean, and when I take him then am I Life of 
a virgin, this is the love of my God. When the A £ ne * 
young man had heard all this he was despaired, as 
he that was taken in blind love, and was over sore 
tormented, in so much that he lay down sick in 
his bed for the great sorrow that he had. Then 
came the physicians and anon knew his malady, 
and said to his father that he languished of carnal 
love that he had to some woman. Then the 
father enquired and knew that it was this woman, 
and did do speak to S. Agnes for his son, and said 
to her how his son languished for her love. S. 

Agnes answered that in no wise she would break 
the faith of her first husband. Upon that the 
provost demanded who was her first husband, of 
whom she so much avaunted, and in his power so 
much trusted. Then one of her servants said she 
was Christian, and that she was so enchanted that 
she said Jesu Christ was her espouse. And when the 
provost heard that she was Christian the provost was 
much glad because to have power on her, for then 
the Christian people were in the will of the lord, and 
if they would not reny their God and their belief 
all their goods should be forfeited. Wherefore 
then the provost made S. Agnes to come in justice 
and he examined her sweetly, and after cruelly by 
menaces. S. Agnes, well comforted, said to him : 

Do what thou wilt, for my purpose shalt thou never 
change. And when she saw him now flattering 
and now terribly angry she scorned him. And the 
provost said to her, being all angiy : One of two 
things thou shalt choose, either do sacrifice to our 
gods with the virgins of the goddess Vesta, or go to 
the bordel to be abandoned to all that thither come, 
to the great shame and blame of all thy lineage. S. 


Digitized by Google 



248 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Agnes answered : If thou knewest who is my 
Life of God thou wouldst not say to me such words, but 
S. Agnes f or a8 muc h as I know die virtue of my God, I 
set nothing by thy menaces, for I have his angel 
which is keeper of my body. Then the judge all 
araged made to take off her clothes, and all naked 
to be led to the bordel. And thus S. Agnes that 
refused to do sacrifice to the idols, was delivered 
naked to go to the bordel, but anon as she was 
unclothed God gave to her such grace that the 
hairs of her head became so long that they covered 
all her body to her feet, so that her body was not 
seen. And when S. Agnes entered into the 
bordel anon she found the angel of God ready for 
to defend her, and environed S. Agnes with a 
bright clearness in such wise that no man might 
see her ne come to her. Then made she of the 
bordel her oratory, and in making her prayers to 
God she sa w tofore her a white vesture, and anon 
therewith she clad her and said : I thank thee 
Jesu Christ which accountest me with thy virgins 
and hast sent me this vesture. All they that 
entered made honour and reverence to the great 
clearness that they saw about S. Agnes, and came 
out more devout and more clean than they entered. 
At last came the son of . the provost with a great 
company for to accomplish his foul desires and 
lusts. And when he saw his fellows come out 
and issue all abashed, he mocked them and called 
them cowards. And then he, all araged, entered 
for to accomplish his evil will. And when he 
came to the clearness, he advanced him for to take 
the virgin, and anon the devil took him by the 
throat and strangled him that he fell down dead. 

And when the provost heard these tidings of 
his son he ran weeping to the bordel, and began 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


249 


crying, to say to S. Agnes : O thou cruel woman, 
why hast thou showed thy enchantment on my 
son ? and demanded of her how his son was 
dead, and by what cause. To whom S. Agnes 
answered : He took him into his power to whom 
he had abandoned his will. Why be not all they 
dead, said he, that entered here tofore him ? For 
his fellows saw the miracle of the great clearness 
and were afeard and went their way unhurt, for 
they did honour to my God which hath clad me 
with this vestment and hath kept my body, but 
your villainous son, as soon as he entered into this 
house began to bray and cry, and when he would 
have laid hand upon me, anon the devil slew him 
as thou seest. If thou mayst raise him, said he, 
it may well appear that thou hast not put him to 
death. And S. Agnes answered : How well that 
thy creance is not worthy to impetre ne get that of 
our Lord, nevertheless because it is time that the 
virtue of God be showed, go ye all out that I may 
make my prayer to God. And when she was in 
her prayers the angel came and raised him to life, 
and anon he went out and began to cry, with a 
loud voice, that the God of Christian men was very 
God in heaven, and in earth, and in the sea, and 
that the idols were vain that they worshipped, 
which might not help them ne none other. 

Then the bishops of the idols made a great 
discord among the people, so that all they cried : 
Take away this sorceress and witch that turned 
men’s minds and alieneth their wits. When the 
provost saw these marvels he would gladly have 
delivered S. Agnes because she had raised his son, 
but he doubted to be banished, and set in his place 
a lieutenant named Aspasius for to satisfy the 
people, and because he could not deliver her he 


The 
Life of 
S. Agnes 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



250 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The departed sorrowfully. This Aspasius did do make 
Life of a great fire among all the people and did do cast 
S. Agnes g # Agnes therein. Anon as this was done the 
flame departed in two parts, and burnt them that 
made the discords, and she abode all whole without 
feeling the fire. The people weened that she had 
done all by enchantment. Then made S. Agnes 
her orison to God thanking him that she was 
escaped from the peril to lose her virginity, arid 
also from the burning of the flame. And when 
she had made her orison the fire lost all his heat, 
and quenched it. Aspasius, for the doubtance of 
the people, commanded to put a sword in her 
body, and so she was martyred. Anon came the 
Christian men and the parents of S. Agnes and 
buried the body, but the heathen defended it, and 
cast so stones at them, that unnethe they escaped. 
She suffered martyrdom in the time of Constantine 
the great, which began to reign the year of our 
Lord three hundred and nine. 

Among them that buried her body was one 
Emerentiana which had been fellow to S. Agnes, 
how be it she was not yet christened, but an holy 
virgin, she came also to the sepulchre of S. Agnes, 
which constantly reproved the gentiles, and of them 
she was stoned to death and slain. Anon there 
came an earthquaver, lightning and thunder, that 
many of the paynims perished, so that forthon the 
Christian people might surely come to the sepulchre 
unhurt, and the body of Emerentiana was buried 
by the body of S. Agnes. It happed that when 
the friends of S. Agnes watched at her sepulchre 
on a night, they saw a great multitude of virgins 
clad in vestments of gold and silver, and a great 
light shone tofore them, and on the right side was 
a lamb more white than snow, and saw also S. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


251 


Agnes among the virgins which said to her The 
parents : T ake heed and see that ye bewail me no Life of 
more as dead, but be ye joyful with me, for with Agnes 
all these virgins Jesu Christ hath given me most 
brightest habitation and dwelling, and am with 
him joined in heaven whom in earth I loved with 
my thought. And this was the eighth day after 
her passion. And because of this vision holy 
church maketh memory of her the eight days of 
the feast after, which is called Agnetis secundo. 

Of her we read an example that in the church 
of S. Agnes was a priest which was named Paulus 
and always served in that church, and had right 
great temptation of his flesh, but because he 
doubted to anger our Lord he kept him from sin, 
and prayed to the pope that he would give him 
leave for to marry. The pope considered his 
simpleness, and for his bounty he gave him a ring 
in which was an emerald, and commanded that he 
should go to the image of S. Agnes which was in 
his church, and pray her that she would be his 
wife. This simple man did so, and the image put 
forth her finger and he set the ring thereon, and 
then she drew her finger again and kept the ring 
fast. And then anon all his temptation carnal 
was quenched and taken away from him, and yet 
as it is said the ring is on the finger of the image. 

Constance the daughter of Constantine was 
smitten with a sore and foul leprosy. When she 
had heard of the vision of S. Agnes, at her tomb 
showed to her friends, she came to the sepulchre 
of S. Agnes, and when she was in her prayers she 
fell asleep, and she saw in her sleep, S. Agnes 
saying to her : Constance, work constantly, and if 
thou wilt believe in Christ, thou shalt anon be 
delivered of thy sickness, wherewith she awoke 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



252 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The and found herself perfectly whole, and anon she 
received baptism, and founded a church upon the 
S. Vincen 0 £ ^ v j r gi n an( j t h e re abode in her virginity, 

and assembled there many virgins, because of her 
good example. In another place it iB read that 
when the church of S. Agnes was void, the pope 
said to a priest that he would give to him a wife 
for to nourish and keep, and he meant to commit 
the church of S. Agnes to his cure. And he 
delivered to him a ring and bade him to wed the 
image, and the image put forth her finger and he 
set on it a ring and anon she closed the finger to 
her hand and kept the ring, and so he espoused 
her. Of this virgin saith S. Ambrose in the book 
of virgins : This virgin, young men, old men and 
children praise, there is none more to be praised 
than that may be praised of all. S. Ambrose 
saith in his preface that this blessed S. Agnes 
despised the delights of noblesse, and deserved 
heavenly dignity, she left the desires of man’s 
fellowship, and she found the fellowship of the 
everlasting King. And she, receiving a precious 
death for the confession of Jesu Christ, is made 
conformable to him everlastingly, to reign in joy in 
heaven, to the which he bring us for whose 
glorious name and faith this glorious virgin S. 
Agnes suffered martyrdom of death. 


Here beginneth the life of S. Vincent . And first of 
the interpretation of his name . 

Vincent is as much to say as burning vices, or 
overcoming burnings and keeping victory, for he 
burnt and destroyed vices by mortification of his 
flesh, he vanquished the burnings of torments by 


Digitized by 


Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


253 


stedfast sufferance, he held the victory of the world The 
by despising of the same. He vanquished three Life of 
things in the world, that is to wit, false errors, s * Vmcen 
foul loves, and worldly dreads, which things he 
overcame by wisdom, by cleanness, and by con- 
stancy. Of whom S. Austin saith that the 
martyrdoms of saints have enseigned that the 
world is overcome with all errors, loves and 
dreads. And some affirm that S. Austin wrote 
and compiled his passion, which Prudentius set 
right clearly in verses. 

Vincent was noble of lineage, but he was more 
noble by faith and religion, and was deacon to S. 

Valerian bishop. He was in his childhood set to 
study, where by divine providence he flowered in 
double science most profoundly, that is to say in 
divinity and humanity ; to whom S. Valerian, 
because he was empeshed in his tongue, committed 
to him the faits and works of charge, and himself 
entended to prayer and contemplation. And by 
the commandment of Dacian the provost, Vincent 
and Valerian were drawn to Valence and there 
ca6t in prison. And when the provost had sup- 
posed they had been almost perished for hunger 
and pain, he commanded them to come tofore him. 

And when he saw them whole and joyful he, 
being wroth,- began to cry much strongly and 
said : What sayest thou Valerian which under the 
name of thy religion dost against the decrees of 
princes? And as the blessed Valerian answered 
lightly, S. Vincent said to him : Worshipful 
father answer him not so with a timorous heart, 
but put out thy voice and escry him freely, and 
father, if thou wilt command me, I shall go 
answer to the judge. To whom Valerian said : 

Right dear son, it is long since I have committed 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



254 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The to thee the charge of speaking, and now it behoveth 
kife of t hee to answer for the faith for which we be here, 
o. Vincent Then S. Vincent turned to the judge, and said to 
Dacian: Thou hast holden unto now words to 
reny our faith, but know thou that it is great 
felony to the wisdom of Christian men to blame 
and reny our Christian faith. Then Dacian, 
being wroth, commanded that the bishop should 
be put in exile, and Vincent as a man presumptuous 
and despitous should be put to be tormented in the 
place named eculeus. And it was made like a 
cross thwart of which the two ends were fixed in 
the earth, and that his members should thereon be 
broken, for to fear the other. And when he was 
all thus tobroken, Dacian said to him: Say 
Vincent now seest thou thy body unhappy ? And 
Vincent smiling said to him : This is all that I 
have desired. Then the provost being wroth 
began to say and menace with many torments, 
and Vincent said to him : O unhappy man, how 
weenest thou to anger me ? the more grievously 
that thou tormentest me, so much more pity shall 
God have on me. Arise up thou unhappy man 
and cursed, and by thy wicked spirit thou shalt be 
vanquished, for thou shalt find me more stronger 
by the virtue of God to suffer thy tprments, than 
thou hast power to torment me. Then the 
provost was angry and began to cry, and the 
butchers took scourges and rods, and began to 
smite and beat him with rods of iron. And S. 
Vincent said : What sayest thou, Dacian ? thou 
thyself avengest me of my torments. Then the 
provost was wood, and aaid to the butchers: Ye 
wretches what do ye, why fail and wax faint 
your hands? Ye have overcome murderers and 
adulterers, so. that they could hide nothing among 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


*55 


your torments, and this Vincent only shall more The 
surmount your torments. Then the butchers took Life of 
combs of iron, and began to comb him on the S. Vincent 
sides within the flesh, that the blood ran down 
over all his body and that the entrails and guts 
appeared by the jointures of his sides. And 
Dacian said to him : Vincent have pity on thyself 
in such wise that thou mayst recover thy fair 
youth, and win to spare the torments that be yet 
to come. And Vincent said to him : O venomous 
tongue of the devil, I doubt nothing of thy torments, 
but I fear sore that thou wilt fain to have mercy 
on me, for so much more as I see thee angry, so 
much more am I rejoiced, I will that thou in no 
wise minish ne lessen thy torments, so that thou 
know that thou be vanquished in all things. 

Then was he taken out of the torment, and was 
brought into a torment of fire, and he blamed and 
reproved the butchers of their long tarrying. 

Then with his goodwill he mounted upon the 
gridiron and there was roasted, broiled and burnt 
in all his members, and was sticked with small 
nails of iron, and pricked with burning pointels of 
iron. And when the blood ran into the fire and 
made wounds upon wounds, then they cast salt 
into the fire, that it should sparkle and spring in 
the wounds of his body, on all parts of the wounds 
that it should more cruelly burn, and do him more 
pain on his body by the flames, in such wise that 
the pricks of iron might not hold on his members, 
but on his entrails which hung out of his body, so 
that he might not move him. And for all this he 
was unmovable, but he prayed our Lord Jesu 
Christ with joined hands up to heaven. And 
when the ministers had said this to Dacian, he 
said : Alas ! we be all vanquished 5 and he liveth 

VOL. 11. R 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



256 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The 
Life of 
S. Vincent 


yet, and because he may yet live longer, shut ye 
him in a much dark prison, and gather together 
all the sharp shells and prick them in his feet, and 
let him be stretched on them without any human 
comfort, and when he shall be dead come and tell 
me. And these right cruel ministers obeyed him 
as to their lord right cruel, but the king for whom 
he suffered the pain so inhuman, changed to him 
all this into joy, for the darknesses were all 
chased away out of the prison by great light, and 
the sharpness of the shells were turned into softness 
and sweetness of all manner of flowers, his feet were 
unbound, and he used the comfort of the honour 
of angels, and like as he had gone on the flowers 
singing with angels, the sweet sound of the song, 
and the sweetness and odour of the flowers, which 
was marvellous, was smelled out of the prison. 
And when the keepers had seen through the 
crevices of the prison this that they saw within, 
they were converted and turned to the faith. And 
when Dacian heard this he was wood, and said : 
What shall we do to him more ? we be overcome. 
Now then let him be borne into a right soft bed, 
with soft clothes, so that he be not made more 
glorious, and to the end that he die not yet, but 
that he be made strong again, and be kempt again 
in new torments. And when he was brought in 
a soft bed, and had therein rested a while he 
rendered and gave up his spirit unto God in the 
year of our Lord two hundred and eighty eight 
under Diocletian and Maximian Emperors. And 
when Dacian heard say that he was dead, he was 
much sorrowful, and said that in that wise he was 
also vanquished : But sith I might not overcome 
him living I shall punish him dead, and if I may 
not have victory I shall be fulfilled of the pain. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


257 


Then the body of S. Vincent was cast in a field The 
for to be devoured of the beasts and fowls, by the Life of 
commandment of Dacian, but it was kept by S. Vincent 
angels from touching of any beasts, and after came 
a raven which drove away all other birds and 
fowls, greater than he was, and chased away also 
a wolf with his bill and beak, and then turned 
his head towards the body as he that marvelled of 
the keeping of the angels. And when Dacian 
heard this thing : I trow, said he, that I may not 
surmount him when he is dead. Then com- 
manded he that he should be cast into the sea 
with a mill stone bound to his neck, to the end 
that he that might not be destroyed upon the 
earth of beasts, should be devoured in the sea of 
belues and great fishes. Then the mariners that 
led the body in to the sea, cast it therein, but the 
body was sooner arrived aland than the mariners 
were, and was found of a lady and of some 
others by the revelation of Jesu Christ, and was 
honourably buried of them. And S. Austin 
saith of this holy blessed martyr, S. Vincent, that 
he vanquished so in words, he vanquished in pains, 
he vanquished in confession, he vanquished in 
tribulation, he overcame the fire, he overcame the 
water, he vanquished death and vanquished life. 

This Vincent was tormented for to dwell with 
God, he was scourged for to be introduced, he 
was beaten for to be enstrengthened, he burnt to 
be purged, he was gladder of the dread of God 
than of the world, and had liefer die to the world 
than to God. Also S. Austin saith in another 
place that a marvellous thing is set tofore our 
eyes, that is : a wicked judge, a cruel tormentor, 
and a martyr not overcome. And Prudentius 
wrote of cruelty and pity, saying that Vincent 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



2 5 8 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The said to Dacian : The torments of the prison, the 
Life of nails, the ongles, the straining combs of iron, 
S. Basil w j t j 1 t k e fl ame8 0 f f re , an d death which is last 
end of the pains, all these be plays and japes to 
Christian men. Then Dacian said as overcome : 


Bind him and draw his arms out of their joints, 
and break ye all the bones in such wise that all 
the members be departed, to the end that the 
breath of him spring out by the holes of his 
members so torn. And the knight of God laughed 
at these things, and blamed the bloody hands 
because they put not the hooks and nails deeper in 
his members. And when he was in the prison 
the angel of God said to him: Arise up noble 
martyr, surely arise up, for thou shalt be our 
fellow, and be accompanied with saints. O knight 
invincible, strongest of all strong, now these aspre 
torments and cruel, doubt thee now a vanquisher. 
And Prudentius saith : Thou art only noble of 
the world, thou bearest only the victory of double 
battle, thou hast deserved two crowns together. 
Pray we then to him that he impetre grace of 
our Lord Jesu Christ that we may deserve to 
come unto his bliss and joy in heaven where he 
reigneth. Amen. 


Here followeth the Life of S. Bas'd \ bishop . And 

first of the interpretation of his name • 

Basil is said of basis in Greek, which is as 
much to say as a foundement, and leos, that is 
people, for he was foundement of them that would 
go to their maker. Or else it is said of basilico a 
serpent, for he overcame the serpent, enemy of 
mankind. 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


259 


S. Basil was a venerable bishop and a solemn The 
doctor, of whom Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium Life of # 
wrote the life. And it was showed in a vision to 
an hermit, named Effrem how much holy he was. 

On a time as the said Effrem was in a trance he 
saw a pillar of fire, whose head reached heaven 
and a voice thereupon saying : Such is Basil, like 
unto this pillar that thou seest. And after this the 
hermit came to the city for to see at the day of 
Epiphany so noble a man, and when he saw him, 
he was clad with a white vesture going honourably 
with the clergy, then the hermit said to himself, 

I see well that I have laboured in vain, and for 
nought, he that is set in such honour may not be 
such as I have seen, we that have borne the burden 
and labour of the heat of the day in great pain, we 
had never such thing, and he here which is set in 
such honour, and also thus accompanied, is a column 
of fire, now I have great marvel what this may be. 

And S. Basil that saw this in spirit, made him to 
be brought to him, and when he was come he saw 
a tongue of fire speaking in his mouth. Then 
said Effrem : Truly Basil is great, truly Basil is 
the pillar of fire, and verily the Holy Ghost 
speaketh in his mouth. And Effrem said to S. 

Basil : Sire, I pray thee that thou impetre of God 
that I may speak Greek, to whom S. Basil said : 

Thou hast demanded a hard thing, nevertheless he 
prayed for him, and he spake Greek. Another 
hermit saw S. Basil, how he went in the habit of 
a bishop and deemed evilly in his thought, how he 
delighted in this estate in vain glory, and anon 
there came a voice that said to him : Thou de- 
lightest thee more in playing with and handling 
thy cat, than Basil doth in all his array and adorn- 
ments. 


Digitized by Google 



260 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Valens the emperor which sustained the Arian 
Life of heretics, took away a church from the Christian 
Basil menj an( j g ave [ t t0 t h e Arians, to whom S. Basil 
said : O thou emperor, it is written : Honor regis 
judicium diligit. The honour of the king requireth 
true judgment, and the doom of a king is justice, 
and wherefore then hast thou commanded that the 
catholic Christian men be put out of holy church ? 
And the emperor said to him : Yet returnest thou 
to say villainy to me ? it appertained not to thee. 
To whom S. Basil said: It appertained well to 
me, and also to die for justice. Then Demosdenes, 
provost of de meats of the emperor, upholder of 
the Arians, spake for dem, and made an answer 
corrupted in language for to make satisfaction. 
And S. Basil said to him : It appertained to thee 
to ordain for the meats of the emperor and not to 
enquire of de teachings divine ; the which, as con- 
fused, held him still, and said not. And de 
emperor said to S. Basil : Now go dou forth and 
judge thou between them, and not for favour ne 
over great love that thou hast to that one party, 
ne for hate that thou hast to dat other. 

Then S. Basil went to them and said tofore de 
Arians and to the Cadolics that the doors of de 
church should be shut fast, and sealed with de seals 
of either party, and that every one should pray to 
God for his right, and that the church should be 
delivered to dem at whose prayer it should open. 
And dus they accorded. The Arians put them 
to prayer dree days and three nights, and when 
dey came to the doors they opened not. Then 
S. Basil ordained a procession, and came to de 
church, and knocked a stroke with his crook, 
saying : Attollite portas principes vestras, etc., and 
anon as he had said the verse the doors opened. 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


261 


and they entered in and gave laud and praisings 
to God, and so was their church rendered to 
them again. And after, the emperor did promise 
to S. Basil much good and honour if he would 
consent to him. And S. Basil said that was 
a demand to make to children, for they that be 
fulfilled with divine words will not suffer that 
one only syllable of the divine science be corrupted. 
Then the emperor had great indignation of him, 
and took a pen for to write the sentence on him 
that he should be exiled, and the first pen brake, 
and the second, and also the third, and his hand 
began to tremble for fear ; then in great indignation 
he all to-rent the schedule. 

There was an honest worshipful man named 
Heradius which had but one daughter, whom he 
disposed to consecrate to God, but the fiend, enemy 
to mankind, inflamed and made one of the servants 
of the same to burn in the love of this maid. And 
when he remembered that he was but a servant, 
him thought it not possible, that ever he should 
attain to come to his desire of so noble a virgin. 
He went to an enchanter to whom he promised 
great quantity of money if he would help him, to 
whom the enchanter answered that he could not 
do it 5 But I shall send thee to the devil which is 
my master and lord, and if thou do that he shall 
say to thee, thou shalt have thy desire ; and the 
young man said he would so do. And this 
enchanter sent a letter by him to the devil, this 
containing : 

My lord and master, because that I must hastily 
and busily draw all them that I may from the 
religion of Christendom, and bring them to thy 
will, to the end that thy party aiway grow and 
multiply, I send to thee this young man, esprised 


The 
Life of 
S. Basil 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



262 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The in the love of the maid, and demandeth that his 
kife of desires may be acomplished, that herein I have 
* glory and honour, and that from now forthon I 
may gather to thee and draw more. Then he 
gave him his letter, and bad him go, and at mid- 
night stand upon the tomb of a paynim, and call 
the devil, and hold up this letter in the air, and 
anon he shall come to thee. And he anon went 
forth and did as he was bidden, and held the letter 
in the air, and forthwith came the prince of dark- 
ness fellowshipped with a great multitude of fiends, 
and when he had read the schedule he said to the 
young man : Wilt thou believe in me if I accom- 
plish thy desire ? And he answered that he would 
so do. Then the devil said to him : Reny then 
Jesu Christ, which said : I reny him. And the 
devil said to him : Ye Christian men, ye be all 
false and untrue, for when ye have to do ye come 
to me, and when ye have that ye demand, anon 
after ye reny me, and return to your Jesu Christ, 
and he receiveth you because he is right debonair ; 
but if thou wilt that I do thy will, make a bond of 
thine own handwriting and deliver it to me, and 
let it contain that thou hast forsaken Jesu Christ, 
thy baptism, and the profession of Christian religion, 
and that thou be my servant and with me at the 
judgment to be damned ; and anon all this he wrote 
and took it to the devil, and put him in his servi- 
tude ; and anon the devil took with him fiends that 
served for fornication, and commanded them that 
they should go and inflame the heart of that maid 
in the love of that young man. The which came 
to her and so inflamed her in the love of that 
young man that she fell down to the ground tofore 
her father crying piteously and saying: Father 
have pity on me, for cruelly I am tormented for 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


263 


the lore of your servant ; have mercy on me, and The 
show to me your fatherly love that ye owe to me, 
that ye give to me in marriage the young man Basl 

that I desire, and if ye do not, ye shall see anon 
that I shall die, and thereof shall ye answer at the 
day of doom. And the father weeping said: 

Alas ! wretched that I am ; what is to me be- 
fallen, God have mercy on my daughter that thus 
taketh away my treasure and quencheth the light 
of mine eyes, I would have given thee to the 
spouse of heaven, and weened to have saved thee, 
and thou art demeasured in worldly love and 
fleshly. Abide daughter and tarry that I may 
marry thee to him that I had purposed, and bring 
not me my last days in sorrow. And she cried 
and said : Father, do as I have said, or anon thou 
shalt see me dead. And so as she wept bitterly 
as out of her wit, the father in great desolation of 
heart moved by the counsel of his friends, and 
deceived, did her pleasure and married her to the 
young man and gave to her all his substance, saying 2 
Go forth my daughter, very caitiff that thou art, 
and forth she went and took him to her husband 
and they dwelled together. The husband went 
not to church, ne he blessed him not, ne recom- 
mended him not to God, whereof many of the 
neighbours noted it, and said to the wife: This 
young man that thou hast taken is not christened, 
ne he goeth not to the church. And when she 
heard that she was much abashed, and for sorrow 
fell down to the ground, and with her nails began 
to scratch her face, and beat her breast and said : 

Alas ! most miserable wretch that I am, whereto 
was I born ? I would I had perished in my birth. 

And then she told her husband what she had heard 
of him, and he answered that it was nothing so ; 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



264 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The then, said she: If thou wilt that I believe thee, 
°.J thou and I shall to-mora go to church, and then 
Basi1 shall I know if it be true that thou sayest. Then 
he yielded him, confused, and saw well that he 
might not deny but it was so, and told to her all 
that he had done. And when she had heard all 
the case how he had done, she began to wail and 
to weep strongly, and forthwith went to S. Basil 
and rehearsed to him all that she had heard of her 
husband. And S. Basil sent for the husband and 
said to him: My son, wilt thou return again to 
God ? Sire, said he, yea, but I may not, for I 
have bound myself to the devil, and renied Jesu 
Christ, and thereof I have made a writing of my 
hand and delivered it to him. And S. Basil said 
to him : Thereof no force ; our Lord is debonair 
and merciful, and shall receive thee if thou repentest 
thee. And anon took the young man and made the 
sign of the cross on his forehead, and shut him in 
a chamber three days. After, he went to see him, 
and demanded saying: My son, how is it with 
thee ? And he answered : Sire, I am in great 
pain, and in great anguish, in such ways that I 
may not bear the clamours, the terrors, and the 
lapidiment8 that the fiends do to me, for they hold 
in their hands my writing in accusing me, and 
saying I came to them and not they to me. Then 
said Basil : My son, be not afeard, but put firmly 
thy belief in Jesu Christ. And S. Basil gave to 
him a little meat for to comfort him and marked 
him with the sign of the cross, and closed him 
again, and he went and prayed for him. After 
certain days passed, he went and visited him again, 
and asked how it was with him, and he answered 
much better than tofore. I hear their clamours 
and their menaces, but I see them not. S. Basil 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


265 


gave him meat and closed the door and blessed The 
him, and went and prayed God for him, and forty 
days after he returned and said to him : My son, * a 1 
how is it with thee ? He answered : Holy 
father, it is well with me this day for I have 
seen thee fight for me, and overcome the devil. 

Then he took him out, and called all the clergy, 
the religiouses, and the people, and warned them 
that they should pray all for him, and led the 
young man by the hand to the church. And 
anon the devil with a great multitude of fiends, 
without seeing of any man, took the young man 
and pained them to take him out of the hand of 
S. Basil. And the young man began to cry 5 Holy 
saint of God, help me. And the fiends enforced 
them so greatly that they made S. Basil to move 
in holding the young man. S. Basil said : Thou 
cursed and cruel fiend, sufficeth not to thee enough 
thy perdition proper, but thou must tempt the 
creatures of my God for to have them lost ? The 
devil then said, hearing many, O Basil, thou 
grievest and annoyest me much. Then all the 
people cried, Kyrie eleison, and S. Basil said to 
the devil : Our Lord God blame and reprove thee, 
cursed fiend. And the devil said to him, Basil, 
thou grievest and annoyest me much ; I went not 
to him, but he came to me, he hath renied his 
God and hath confessed me to be his lord, lo ! 
here in my hand the writing that he gave to me. 

And S. Basil said to him : We shall not cease 
to pray for him unto the time that thou shalt 
deliver his writing. And thus as S. Basil prayed 
holding the hand of the young man, the schedule 
which he had made was brought in the air in the 
sight of all, and was laid in the hand of S. Basil, 
the which received it and said to the child : 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



266 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Brother, knowest thou these letters ? And he 
Life of answered him : I know them well, for they were 
S. Basil wr j tten ^th my hand. Then S. Basil brake 
them, and led the child to the church, and so 
ordained and disposed him, that he was worthy 
to receive the holy sacrament and after, he being 
enseigned and taught, delivered to him a rule how 
he should keep him, and delivered him to his wife. 

Also there was a woman that had committed 
many sins, the which she all wrote, and at 
the end there was one more grievous than the 
other, which in the writing she delivered to S. 
Basil, praying him to pray for her, and that by 
his prayers her sins might be forgiven. And 
then he prayed for her, and the woman opened 
the bill, wherein she found all the sins defaced 
and put out except the grievous sin. And she 
came to S. Basil and said : Thou holy saint of 
God, have mercy on me, and get me forgiveness 
for this, like as thou hast done for the other, and 
S. Basil said to the woman : Leave and go from 
me, woman, for I am a man, sinful as thou art, 
which have need of pardon as much as thou. 
And as that she was busy and grievous to him, 
he said to her : Go unto the holy man that is 
named EfFrem, and demand of him that he may 
get pardon for thee. And when she came to the 
holy man EfFrem, and had told to him where- 
fore she was sent to him from S. Basil, he said 
to her : Go from me, for I am a sinful man, but 
go again to S. Basil, and it is he that may get 
thee forgiveness for this sin like as he did for die 
other ; and haste thee to the end that thou mayst 
find him alive. And when she came into the 
city, S. Basil was borne to the church for to be 
buried, and she began to cry, saying: God be 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


267 


judge between me and thee, for thou mayst well The 
appease God for me, and thou hast sent me to Ltfcof 
another, and anon she threw the bill upon the 
covering of the bier. And anon after she took 
it again, and opened it, and found it all plain, 
and out clean of the bill, and then with others 
she gave thankings to God. Tofore or S. Basil 
died, he being in the malady that he died, he did 
do come a Jew to him which was much expert 
in physic, and he loved him because he saw that 
he should be converted to the faith. And when 
he was come, he felt his pulse, and saw that he 
was nigh his end, and said to his meiny : Make 
ye ready such thing as behoveth for his sepulture, 
for he shall die anon. Which word S. Basil 
heard and said to him : Thou wottest not what thou 
sayest ; and the Jew, named Joseph, said to him : 

This day shalt thou die when the sun shall go 
down in the west. To whom S. Basil said : 

What shalt thou say if I die not this day ? To 
whom Joseph said : Sire, it is not otherwise 
possible. Then said S. Basil : if I live unto the 
morrow noon what shalt thou do ? And Joseph 
said : If thou live until the morrow that hour I 
shall die; and S. Basil said: thou sayst truth, 
thou shalt die, that is, sin shall die in thee to the 
end that thou shalt live in Jesu Christ. And 
Joseph said: I wot well what thou sayest, and 
if thou live unto that time I shall do that thou 
sayest. Then S. Basil said, how well that by 
nature he should have died anon forthwith, yet 
he gat and impetred of God space that he should 
not then die, and lived unto the morn at noon, 
which thing seeing, Joseph marvelled much and 
believed in Jesu Christ. 

S. Basil then took heart, and overcame the 


Digitized by Google 



268 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life feebleness of the body, and arose out of his bed, 
1 h°^h * an d went to the church, and with his proper 
Almoner hands baptized the Jew, and after returned to his 
bed, and anon gave up his spirit, and rendered 
his soul unto God about the year of our Lord 
three hundred and seventy. Then let us pray to 
him that he get us grace of our Lord Jesu Christ, 
that he will forgive us all our sins. 


Here fottowetb the Life of S. John the Almoner . 

S. John the Almoner was patriarch of Jerusalem. 
He saw on a time, in a vision, a much fair maid, 
which had on her head a crown of olive, and 
when he saw her he was greatly abashed and de- 
manded her what she was ? This maid answered 
to him : I am Mercy which brought from heaven 
the son of God, if thou wilt wed me, thou shalt 
fare the better. Then he, understanding that the 
olive betokeneth mercy, began that same day to 
be merciful in such wise that he was called 
Almoner or amener, and he called alway the poor 
people his lords. Then he called his servants 
and said to them : Go through the city and write 
ye all the names of my lords, and when he saw 
that they understood not his words, he said to 
them : They be they that ye call poor and 
mendicants, I call them my lords, and I say they 
be my helpers, and trust it well that they mow 
help and get me the kingdom of heaven. And 
because he would stir the people to do alms, he 
said that when the poor men were once together 
warming them against the sun, they began to tell 
who were good almsmen, and them would they 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 269 

praise, and blame them that were evil. Among 
all other he told this narration. 

There was sometime a toller named Peter in a 
city, and was a much rich man, but he was not 
piteous, but cruel to poor people, for he would 
hunt and chase away poor people and beggars 
from his house with indignation and anger. Thus 
would no poor man come to him for alms. Then 
was there one poor man said to his fellows : What 
will ye give me if I get of him an alms this day ? 
And they made a wager with him that he should 
not, which done, he went to this toller’s house 
and stood at the gate, and demanded alms. And 
when this rich man came and saw this poor man 
at his gate he was much angry and would have 
cast somewhat at his head, but he could find 
nothing, till at last came one of his servants bearing 
a basket full of bread of rye, and in a great anger, 
he took a rye loaf, and threw it at his head, as 
he that might not hear the cry of the poor man. 
And he took up the loaf and ran to his fellows 
and said truly that he had received that loaf of 
Peter’s own hand. And then within two days 
after, this rich man was sick, and like for to die, 
and as he lay he was ravished in spirit, in which 
he saw that he was set in judgment, and black 
men bringing forth his wicked deeds, and laid 
them in a balance on that one side, and on that 
other side he saw some clothed in white, mourning 
and sorrowful, but they had nothing to leave 
against them in that other balance, and one of 
them said: Truly we have nothing but a rye loaf 
which he gave to God against his will but two 
days gone. And then they put that loaf into 
that balance, and him seemed the balances were 
like even. Then they said to him : Increase and 


Digitized by 


Google 


The Life 
of S. 
John the 
Almoner 



270 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life multiply this rye loaf, or else thou must be de- 
of S. livered to these black moors or fiends. And 
when be awoke he said : Alas ! if a rye loaf have 
so much availed me which I gave in despite, how 
much should it have availed me if I had given 
all my goods to poor men with a good will. As 
this rich man went on a day clothed with his best 
clothes, a poor shipman came to him all naked 
and demanded of him some clothing, for the love 
of God, to cover him withal, and he anon de- 
spoiled himself, and gave to him his rich clothing, 
that he ware, and anon the poor man sold it; 
and when he knew that the poor man had sold 
it, he was so sorry that he would eat no meat, 
but he said: Alas! I am not worthy that the 
poor man think upon me. And the night follow- 
ing when he slept, he saw one brighter than the 
sun, having a cross on his head wearing the same 
cloth that he had given to the poor man, and he 
said to him : Why weepest thou Tollener ? And 
when he had told him the cause of his sorrow, 
he said to him : Knowest thou this cloth ? And 
he said : Yea, Sire ; and then our Lord said : I 
have been clothed therewith sith thou gavest it to 
me, and I thank thee of thy good will that thou 
hadst pity of my nakedness, for when I was a 
cold thou coveredst me. And when he awoke 
he blessed the poor people, and said: By the 
living God ! if I live I will be one of his poor 
men. And when he had given all his good to 
poor men, he called one of his secret men whom 
he trusted well and said to him : I have a secret 
counsel to tell thee, and if thou keep it not secret 
and do as I bid thee, I shall sell thee to the 
heathen men. And he took him ten pound in 
gold and had him go into the holy city, and buy 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


271 


some necessary ware, and when thou hast so done, The Life 
take me and sell me to some Christian man, and S, 
take that money that thou shalt receive for me, 
and give it to poor people. And the servant 
refused it, and he said : Truly if thou sell me not, 

I shall sell thee to the barbaries. And then he 
took this Peter the tollener as he had commanded 


him, which was his master, clad in vile clothing, 
and led him to the market and sold him to an 


argenter for thirty besants, which he took and 
dealt it among poor men. This Peter then thus 
sold was bound and put into a kitchen for to do 
all foul works, in such wise that he was despised 
of every man of the servants. And some oft 
smote him and knocked him about the head, and 
called him fool. Christ appeared oft to him and 
showed him his clothing and the besants and com- 
forted him. And the Emperor and other people 
were sorry for Peter the tollener. And it happed 
that noble men of Constantinople came unto the 
place whereas Peter was for to visit holy places, 
whom the master of Peter bade to dinner, and 
as they sat and ate at their dinner, Peter served 
and passed by them, and they, beholding him, 
said to each other in their ears, how like is this 
young man to Peter the tollener, and as they 
well saw and advised him they said : Verily it is 
my lord Peter ; I shall arise and hold him, and 
when Peter understood that he fled away privily. 

There was a porter which was both deaf and 
dumb, and by signs he opened the gates, and Peter 
bade him by words to open the gates; and he 
anon heard him and receiving speech answered 
him, and Peter went his way. And the porter 
returned into the house speaking and hearing, 
whereof all they marvelled, to whom he said: 


s 


VOL. II. 


Digitized by Google 



272 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life He that was in the kitchen is gone out and fleeth 
of S. away, but know ye for certain that he is the 
^Urnon** 8ervant God, for as he spake and bade me 

r open the gate, there issued out of his mouth a 
flame of fire, which touched my tongue and mine 
ears, and anon I received hearing and speaking. 
And anon they all went out and ran after him, 
but they might not find him. Then all they of 
the house repented them, and did penance, because 
they had so foul entreated him. 

There was a monk named Vital which would 
assay if he might raise any slander against S. John. 
And S. John came in to a city and went unto all 
the bordels of common women and said to each 
of them by order : Give me this night and do no 
fornication. Then he entered into the house of 
one and was in a corner all the night on his knees 
in prayer and prayed for her. And on the morn 
he went and commanded to each of them that they 
should tell it to no man, yet one of them manifested 
his life. And anon as S. John had prayed she 
began to be tormented with a devil, and anon the 
other women said to her : God hath given to thee 
that that thou hast deserved, because she entered 
for to do fornication and not for none other cause. 
And when it was even, the foresaid monk Vital 
said tofore them all : I will go thither, for that 
woman abideth me, then many blamed him, and 
he answered and said : Am I not a man as another 
is? I have a body as other men have, is God 
only wrath with monks ? they be men as other 
be. Then some of them said to him: Take to 
thee a wife, and change thine habit so that thou 
scandal not others. He feigning himself wroth 
said : V erily I shall not hear you, who that will be 
slandered let him be slandered, and let him smite 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


273 


his forehead against the wall, be ye ordained to The Life 
be my judges of God ? Go ye and take heed of of S. 
yourselves, for ye shall give none accounts for me ; 
and this he said with a loud voice. And then 
they complained to S. John of his governance, but 
our Lord harded so his heart that he gave no 
credence to their words, but he prayed God that he 
would show his works to some creature after his 
death, and that it should not turn to his blame that 
defamed him. By this means he brought many 
for to be converted, and set of them many for to 
be closed in religion. In a morning, as he went 
from them one of these common Women met with 
a man that entered in for to do fornication, who 
gave to him a buffet and said : Thou wicked man, 
why amended thou not thy wicked living ? And 
he said to him : Believe me right well that thou 
shalt have such a buffet that all Alexandria shall 
assemble to wonder on thee. And after that the 
fiend came in likeness of a man, and gave him a 
buffet, and said to him : This is the buffet that 
the abbot Vital promised thee, and anon he was 
ravished with the fiend, and tormented so that all 
the people drew to him and wondered on him; 
but at the last he was repentant and was healed by 
the prayers of S. Vital. And when the servant 
of God was nigh his end he left in writing to his 
disciples : Judge ye never before the time ; and 
when he was dead the women confessed what he 
had done, and all they glorified God, and namely 
S, John, saying : Would God that ilke buffet that 
he took I had taken. 

There was a poor man in the habit of a pilgrim 
came to S. John and demanded alms, and he called 
his dispenser and bade him to give to him sixpence, 
which he received, and went his way, and changed 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



274 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life 
of S. 
John the 
Almoner 


his clothing, and came to the patriarch and asked 
aliqs, and he called his dispenser and bade him to 
give him sixpence of gold, and when he had given 
to him and was departed, the dispenser said to 
his lord: Father, at your request this man hath 
received twice alms this day, and hath changed 
his habit twice ; S. John feigned as he had not 
heard it. And the poor man changed his clothing 
the third time, and came again to S. John, and 
asked yet the third time alms, and then the dis- 
penser told his lord privily that he was the same 
beggar, to whom S. John said: Give to him 
twelve besants, lest it be my Lord Jesu Christ 
that will prove me whether he might more take or 

1 S ive# 

On a time it happed that one Patricius had 
certain money of the church which he would put 
in merchandise, but the patriarch would in no wise 
consent thereto, but would it should be given to 
poor people, and they could not accord but 
departed all wroth. And after evensong time 
the patriarch sent to the archpriest Patricius, 
saying : Sir, the sun is nigh gone down, and he 
hearing that anon he wept, and came to him and 
asked for forgiveness. On a time the nephew of 
the patriarch suffered wrong of a taverner, and 
complained lamentably to the patriarch and could 
not be comforted, and the patriarch said to him : 
Who is so hardy that dare say against thee or 
open his mouth against thee ? Believe me, son, 
that I shall this day do for thee such a thing that 
all Alexandria shall wonder on it. And when he 
heard that he was well comforted, weening that 
the taverner should have been sore beaten. And 
S. John seeing that he was comforted kissed his 
breast and said : Son, if thou be verily the nephew 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 275 

of mine humility, make thee ready to be scourged The Life 
and to suffer of every man beatings, chidings and S. 
wrongs, for very affinity is not only of flesh and Aimpnpr 
blood, but it is known by the strength of virtue : 
and anon he sent for that man and made him free 
of all pension and tribute. And all they that 
heard this wondered greatly, and then understood 
they that he had said before, that he would so do 
that all Alexandria should wonder thereof. 

The patriarch hearing of the custom that is 
when the emperor is crowned, there shall come 
to him the makers of sepultures and bring stones 
of marble of divers colours, and demand the 
emperor of what stones he will have his grave 
made, or of what metal. S. John remembering 
this, commanded to make his sepulture, but yet 
he did not do make it all but left it imperfect unto 
his end. And he ordained that at every feast, 
when he was with the clergy, some should come 
to him and say : Sire, thy monument or sepulture 
is not all made, but imperfect, command that it 
may be made, for thou wotest not what hour thou 
shaft die, ne when the thief cometh. 

There was a rich man which saw S. John, 
having in his bed but vile clothes and not rich, 
for he had given all his goods to poor men. He 
bought for him a much rich coverture for his bed 
and gave it to S. John. And in a night, as it lay 
upon him, he could not sleep, for he thought three 
hundred of his lords might well have been covered 
withal, and made all that night lamentation, saying : 

Ah Lord, how many be there of my lords now in 
the mire, how many in the rain, how many so 
cold that their teeth beat together, and how many 
that sleep in the market place ; and said to him- 
self : And thou wretch devourest the great fishes, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



276 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 

The Life and restest in thy chamber with thy wickedness 
°fS. under a coverture of twenty-six pounds to warm 

Almoner ^ carrion. And after he would never be 
covered therewith, but on the morn he did do 
sell it and gave the money thereof to poor people. 
And when the rich man saw it he bought it again 
and took it to the blessed S. John and desired him 
no more to sell it, but keep it for himself. And 
anon after S. John sold it again and gave the 
money of it to poor people. And when the rich 
man wist it, yet he bought it again and brought it 
to S. John full goodly, and said to him: We shall 
see who shall fail of us, or thou in the selling or 
I in the buying ; and thus it was oft bought and 
sold, the rich man seeing well that he might well 
minish his riches in this manner without sin, to 
the intent to give it to poor people. And they 
both should win in this manner, that one in 
saving of their souls, and that other in getting 
reward. And S. John would draw men to do 
alms in this manner; he was accustomed to tell of 
S. Serapion, when he had given his mantle to a 
poor man and after met with another that had 
cold, he gave him his coat, and himself sat all 
naked. And one demanded of him : Father, who 
hath despoiled thee? And he had in his hand 
the book of the evangelists and said : This hath 
despoiled me. And anon he saw another poor 
man, and then he sold the book of gospels and 
gave the price thereof to poor men, and when he 
was demanded where his book of the gospels was, 
he answered and said : That the gospel com- 
mandeth and saith : Go and sell all that thou hast, 
and give it to the poor, I had this gospel and I 
have sold it like as he commanded. 

On a time he gave to a poor man five besants, 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


277 


and the poor man had disdain thereof and began The Life 

to chide and despise him in his visage because he of S. 

had no more alms, and when his servants saw that, 

they would have beaten him, and then the blessed 

John defended them saying : Suffer ye him brethren 

and let him curse me, lo i I have these thirty 

years blasphemed by my works Christ, and may 

not I bear one blame or vice of this man ? And 

he commanded that a sack of money full should 

be brought tofore this poor man, that he should 

take as much as he would. 

On a time, after that the gospel was read in the 
church, the people went out and talked idle tales, 
and this holy patriarch apperceived them and 
followed after and sat down among them, and said 
to them : Sons, there as the sheep be, there must 
be the shepherd also, and therefore, either ye must 
enter with me into the church or else I must abide 
with you here, and thus he did twice and thereby 
he taught the people to abide and stand in the 
church. 

Another time there was a young man had 
ravished a nun, and the clerks reproved the 
young man thereof tofore S. John, and said he 
ought to be cursed therefor, because he had 
lost two souls, His own and the nun’s. Then S. 

John withstood their sentence saying : Not so 
my sons, not so, I shall show that ye commit 
two sins : first, ye do against the commandment 
of God which saith : Judge ye not, and ye 
shall not be judged. Secondly, ye wit not for 
certain whether they have sinned into this day, 
and have not been penitent and have repented 
them. It fell many times that S. John was 
ravished in his prayers, and was in a trance, and 
he was heard dispute with our Lord in these 


Digitized by Google 



2 7 8 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The Life words : So, good Lord Jesu Christ, so ; I in 
of S. parting and thou in ministering, let us see who 
^^shaU overcome. 

On a time when he was sick and vexed with 
the fevers, and saw that he approached his end, 
he said : I yield to thee thankings for thou hast 
heard my wretchedness praying thy goodness that 
at my death should be found with me but one 
besant or one piece of money, and that yet I 
command to be given to the poor. And then he 
yielded his soul unto Almighty God. And his 
venerable body was put in a sepulchre where the 
bodies of two bishops were buried, and the two 
bodies by miracle gave room and place to the body 
of S. John, for they removed each from other and 
left the middle void for his body. 

A little time tofore his death there was a woman 
had committed a great and horrible sin, and durst 
not be shriven thereof ne show it to no man. S. 
John bade her write it and seal it, and bring it to 
him, and he would pray for her. She assented 
thereto; she wrote her sin, and diligently closed 
and sealed it and delivered it to S. John. And 
anon after S. John waxed sick and died, and 
when she heard that he was dead she supposed 
herself confused and shamed, for she weened that 
he had delivered it to some other man, and she 
came to his tomb, and there wept and cried much 
lamentably, saying : Alas ! alas ! I supposed to 
have eschewed my confusion and now I am made 
confusion unto all others, and wept bitterly praying 
S. John that he would show to her where he had 
left her writing. And suddenly S. John came and 
appeared to her in the habit of a bishop, on either 
side of him a bishop, and said to the woman : Why 
troublest thou me so much, and these saints with 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


279 


me, and sufferest not us to have rest ? Lo, here The 
our clothes be all wet of thy tears, and then Conver- 
delivered to her her scroll again, sealed as it was g°pa U i 
tofore, saying to her : See here thy seal, open thy 
writing and read it 5 which anon she opened and 
all her sin was defaced and clean out, and she 
found therein written : All thy sin is forgiven and 
put away by the prayer of John, my servant. And 
then she rendered thankings to our Lord God 
and to S. John, and then S. John with the two 
bishops returned into their sepulture. This holy 
man S. John flourished in the year of our Lord 
six hundred and five, in the time of Phocas the 
emperor. 


Of the Conversion of S . Paul and of the name 
. of conversion 

Conversion is said of convertor, I am turned, or 
is as much as together turned from sins and evils. 
He is not converted that shriveth him to the priest 
of one sin and hideth another. It is said con- 
version, for S. Paul this day was converted to the 
faith leaving his vices. Why he is said Paul, it 
shall be said afterward. 


Of the Conversion of S. Paul • 

The conversion of S. Paul was made the same 
year that Christ suffered his passion, and S. 
Stephen was stoned also, not in the year natural, 
but appearing. For our Lord suffered death the 
eighth calends of April, and S. Stephen suffered 
death the same year, the third day of August, and 
was stoned. And S. Paul was converted the eighth 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



28 o 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The calends of february. And three reasons been 
Conver- assigned wherefore the conversion of S. Paul is 
hallowed more than of other saints. 

First for the ensample, because that no sinner, 
whatsomever he be, should despair of pardon when 
he seeth him that was in so great sin to be in so 
great joy. Secondly for the joy, for like as the 
church had great sorrow in this persecution, so had 
she great joy in his conversion. Thirdly, for the 
miracle that our Lord showed when of one so 
cruel a persecutor was made so true a preacher. 
The conversion of him was marvellous by reason 
of him that made him, and of him that ordained 
him, and of the patient that suffered it. By 
reason of him that made him to be converted, that 
was Jesu Christ, which showed there his mar- 
vellous puissance in that he said : It is hard for 
thee to strive against the alle or pricks; and in 
that he changed him so suddenly, for anon as he 
was changed he said: Lord what wilt thou that 
I do ? Upon this word saith S. Austin : The 
lambs slain of the wolves have made of a wolf a 
lamb, for he was ready for to obey, that tofore 
was wood for to persecute. Secondly, he showed 
his marvellous wisdom. His marvellous wisdom 
was in that he took from him the swelling of 
pride in offering to him the inward things of 
humility and not the height of majesty. For he 
said I am Jesus of Nazareth, and he called not 
himself God ne the sqn of God, but he said to 
him, take thine infirmities of humanity and cast 
away the squames of pride. Thirdly, he showed 
his pitiful debonairty and mercy, which is signified 
in that that he that was in deed and in will to 
persecute, he converted, how be it he had evil 
will, as he that desired all the menaces and 


Digitized by Google 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


281 


threatenings, and had evil purpose 5 as he that The 
went to the prince of priests 5 as he that had a Conver- 
joy in his evil works that he led the Christian men g°p^ 
bound to Jerusalem. And therefore his journey 
and voyage was right evil, and yet nevertheless by 
the mercy of God was he converted. Secondly 
the conversion was marvellous of him that ordained 
it, that is of the light that he ordained in his con- 
version. And it is said that this light was dis- 
positive, sudden, and celestial, and this light of 
heaven advironed him suddenly. Paul had in him 
these vices. The first was hardiness, which is 
noted when it is said that he went to the prince of 
the priests, and as the gloss saith, not called, but by 
his own will and envy that enticed him. The 
second was pride, and that is signified by that he 
desired and sighed the menaces and threatenings. 

The third was the intent carnal, and the under- 
standing that he had in the law, whereof the gloss 
saith upon that word : I am Jesus, etc. I God 
of heaven speak, the which thou supposest to be 
dead by the consent of the Jews. And this light 
divine was sudden, it was great, and out of measure, 
for to throw down him that was high and proud, 
into the ditch or pit of humanity ; it was celestial, 
because it turned and changed his fleshly under- 
standing into celestial, or it may be said that this 
ordinance or disposition was in three things ; that 
is to wit in the voice crying, in the light shining, 
and in the virtue of puissance. Thirdly, it was 
marvellous by the virtue of the suffering of the 
patient, that is of Paul in whom the conversion 
was made. For these three things were made in 
him withoutforth marvellously, that it is to wit, 
that he was beaten to the earth, he was blind and 
fasted three days, and was smitten down to the 


Digitized by Google 



282 


THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


The ground for to be raised. And S. Austin saith 
Conver- that he was smitten down for to be blind, for to 
S Paul k® Ranged* and for to be sent ; he was sent to 
suffer death for truth. And yet saith S. Austin, 
he that was out of the faith was hurt for to be 
made believe, the persecutor was hurt for to be 
made a preacher, the son of perdition was hurt for 
to be made the vessel of election, and was made 
blind for to be illumined, and this was as touching 
his dark understanding. 

Then in the three days that he abode thus 
blind, he was learned and informed in the gospel, 
for he learned it never of man ne by man, as he 
himself witnesseth, but by the revelation of Jesu 
Christ. And S. Austin saith thus : I say that 
S. Paul was the very champion of Jesu Christ, 
taught of him, redressed of him, crucified with 
him, and glorious in him. He was made lean in 
his flesh that his flesh should be disposed to the 
effect of good operation, and from forthon his 
body was established and disposed to all good. 
He could well suffer hunger and abundance, and 
was informed and instructed in all things, and all 
adversities he gladly suffered. Chrysostom saith : 
He overcame tormentors, tyrants, and people full 
of woodness, like as flies; and the death, the 
torments and all the pains that might be done to 
him, he counted them but as the play of children. 
All them he embraced with a good will, and he 
was ennobled in himself to be bound in a strong 
chain more than to be crowned with a crown, and 
received more gladly strokes and wounds than 
other gifts. And it is read that in him were 
three things against the three that were in our 
foremost father Adam, for Adam erected and 
addressed him against God our Lord, and in 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



THE GOLDEN LEGEND 


283 


S. Paul was contrary for he was thrown down to The 
the earth. In Adam was the opening of his eyes, Comrer- 
and Paul was on the contrary made blind, and g°p^| 
Adam ate of the fruit defended, and S. Paul 
contrary was abstinent of convenable meat* 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



GLOSSARY 


achate , n., purchase. 
adj ousted, pp., Pr. aj outer, 
added. 

argenter,n., a mone /changer. 
aspre, adj., Fr. dpre, cruel. 
awaits , snares. 

bained, pp., Fr. baigner, 
bathed. 

belues, n., whales, or sea 
monsters. 

hies sure, rt. (Fr. ), a wound. 
blyven, pp, of ‘ be leave,' re- 
mained. 

broches, n., pointed rods. 
bubals , n., wild oxen. 
bynomen, pp. of 4 benim,' to 
take away. 

caricares, n., figs. 
cautelously, adv ., craftily. 
chevisshed , v ., achieved his 
purpose. 

chore ( for 4 cor '), n. , a Hebrew 
measure of about eight 
bushels. 

coarted, pp., constrained or 
coerced. 

coles, n., cabbages. 
colestaff, n., a pole for carry- 
ing a burden between two 
persons. 

conveying, pr. p. , guidance. 

deduit, n. (Fr.), pleasure, 
comfort. 

demene, v., exhibit. 
did do make— caused to be 
made. 

284 


dilection, n., love. 

| dime, n., a tithe. 

! direption , n., pillage. 
disperpled, pp., scattered. 

empesh, v. , Fr. empicher , to 
hinder. 

fardel, n. , a burden. 

habergeon, n., coat of scale 
armour. 

hallows, n. , saints or chosen 
people. 

havoir, n., worldly goods. 
houseled, v. , administered the 
eucharist. 

impetre, v., beseech. 
japes, n., jests or scoffs. 
kele, v., cool. 

maleurte, n., misery. 
mechant, adj. (Fr.), wicked. 
meiny, n., company or re- 
tinue. 

muyes, n. , Fr. muids, measures 
of about five quarters. 

octroy, v. (Fr.), to bestow. 
ongles, n. (Fr.), claws. 
ouches, n. , jewels. 

phitoness, n., witch. 
piscine, n. , a pool. 
pois, n., weight. 
presrly, adv., quickly. 
prise, n., capture. 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



GLOSSARY 


285 


quarfox , n., four meeting 
ways. 

releved , v., Fr. relever, to 
raise up. 

tighter , executioner. 

routed , v., snored. 

sacre, v., Fr. sacrer, to con- 
secrate. 

sifted, v. t Fr. sifter, whistled. 
sikerness, n., surety. 
smaragdos, n., emeralds. 
spere, v,, inquire or search. 


spincops, n., spiders. 
squames, n., scales. 
stagne, n., Fr. Hang, lake. 
sweven , n., a dream. 

toller , tollener, tax-farmer. 

unguentaries t makers of 
perfumes. 

unnet he, adv., scarcely. 
urchin, n., a hedgehog. 

wood, woodness, n., mad, 
madness. 


END OF VOL. II 


Printed by T. and A. Constable, Printers to Her Majesty 
at the Edinburgh University Press 


Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 




Digitized by V^jOOQIC 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 


^ /i 



Digitized by vjOOQ 1C 



Princeton University Library 



iiiiiliiliiiiliiliiiiliiiiiiiliiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

32101 076208402 


* 


Digitized by Google 



