This  is  a reproduction  of  a library  book  that  was  digitized 
by  Google  as  part  of  an  ongoing  effort  to  preserve  the 
information  in  books  and  make  it  universally  accessible. 

Google”  books 

http://books.google.com 


*»TI«  SCIENTlA  VERITAS 


Digitized  by  Goode 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


OLIVES 
SffiSSAINTS 
“ENGLISHED 
^ WILLIAM 
CAXTON 
VOL  THREE 


a* 


•3»MD'C0:^l 


► i Me  f*  HOU56  • LOJSDON-W-C' 
irie  ' r„g  „.«,Gc)o<5le  &JHTT* 

ON'WW* 


BA 

4t>54- 
.T/7 
1 90  D 


Digitized  by 


I 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Here  followeth  of  S.  Pauline  the  Widow 

S.  Pauline  was  a much  noble  widow  of  Rome,  The  Life 
of  whom  S.  Jerome  wrote  the  life,  and  saith  first  S. 
thus  : If  all  my  members  were  turned  into  tongues,  ^auUne 
and  all  my  arteries  should  resound  in  human 
voice,  yet  I might  not  worthily  write  the  virtues 
of  S.  Pauline.  I take  witness  of  God  and  of  his 
holy  angels,  and  also  of  the  angel  that  was  keeper 
of  this  woman  that  I shall  say  nothing  for  praising 
but  that  same  that  I shall  say  shall  be  less  than 
appertaineth  to  her  virtues.  She  was  born  among 
the  nobles  of  the  senators  of  Rome,  and  of  the 
lineage  of  the  noble  Gregois,  rich  of  good  and 
puissant  of  seignory  at  Rome.  She  was  the  most 
humble  of  all  other,  for  like  as  the  sun  surmounteth 
the  clearness  of  the  stars,  so  surmounted  she  the 
beauty  of  others  by  her  great  humility. 

When  her  husband  was  passed  out  of  this  world, 
she  abode  lady  of  all  the  goods  and  riches.  It 
happed  that,  at  the  mandment  of  the  Emperor, 
many  bishops  came  to  Rome,  among  whom  were 
there  the  holy  man  Paulinus,  the  patriarch  of 
Antioch,  and  Epiphanius,  bishop  of  Cyprus,  of 
whom  she  was  esprised  in  good  virtues,  so  that 
9he  gave  largely  of  her  goods  for  God’s  sake. 

Her  parents,  ne  her  friends,  ne  her  own  children 
could  not  turn  her,  ne  make  her  to  change  her 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


2 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  purpose,  but  that  she  would  become  the  pilgrim  of 
of  S.  Jesu  Christ,  for  the  amorous  desire  that  she  had  to 
au  e Jesu  Christ  surmounted  the  love  that  she  had  to 
her  children.  Only  among  all  her  children  she 
had  put  her  affection  in  Eustochium  her  daughter, 
whom  she  led  with  her  in  this  pilgrimage.  She 
took  the  sea  and  sailed  so  far  that  she  came  into 
the  holy  land  of  Jerusalem.  O how  great  de- 
votion she  had  to  visit  the  sepulchre  of  Jesu  Christ 
and  the  other  holy  places,  and  how  all  weeping 
she  kissed  them,  there  can  no  man  rehearse.  All 
the  city  of  Jerusalem  could  speak  of  it,  and  yet 
best  of  all  knew  the  Lord  for  whose  love  she  had 
forsaken  all  things. 

She  had  been  at  Rome  so  puissant  and  so  noble, 
that  every  man  coveted  to  do  to  her  honour  for  her 
great  renomee,  but  she  that  was  founded  upon 
humility  sought  the  humble  places  and  religious, 
and  came  at  the  last  to  Bethlehem.  And  when 
she  had  devoutly  visited  the  place  in  which  the 
Virgin  Mary  infanted  and  child ed  Jesu  Christ,  she 
fell  in  a vision,  and  as  she  sware  to  me,  she  saw 
in  that  vision  the  child  wrapped  in  poor  clouts 
lying  in  the  crib  or  in  the  rack,  and  how  the  three 
kings  worshipped  him,  how  the  star  came  upon 
the  house,  and  how  the  shepherds  came  to  see 
him,  and  how  Herod  made  persecution  upon  the 
innocents,  and  how  Joseph  bare  the  child  into 
Egypt.  And  this  vision  she  said,  all  in  weeping 
and  in  laughing,  and  said : I salute  thee  Bethlehem 
wherein  he  is  born,  that  descended  from  heaven, 
of  thee  prophesied  Micah  the  fifth  chapter,  that 
of  thee  should  be  bom  the  God  that  should  - 
govern  the  people  of  Israel,  and  the  lineage  of 
David  should  endure  in  thee  unto  the  time  that 
the  glorious  virgin  should  enfant  Jesu  Christ ; and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


3 


I wretched,  as  unworthy  to  repute  me  to  kiss  the  The  Life 
crib  in  which  our  Lord  wept  as  a child,  and  °f  S. 
the  virgin  childed,  here  I shall  take  my  rest  and  Pa'“me 
my  dwelling,  for  my  Saviour  chose  this  place  in 
Bethlehem. 

She  made  there  her  habitation  with  many  virgins 
that  served  God,  and  how  well  that  she  was  lady 
of  all,  nevertheless  she  was  the  most  humble  and 
meek  in  speaking,  in  habit,  and  in  going,  in  such 
wise  that  she  seemed  servant  of  all  the  other.  She 
never  ate  after  the  death  of  her  husband  with  no 
man,  how  good  that  he  was ; she  visited  as  it  is 
said  tofore,  all  the  holy  places  and  the  monks  of 
Egypt,  among  whom  were  many  of  the  ancient 
fathers  and  many  holy  men,  and  her  seemed  that 
she  saw  Jesu  Christ  among  them.  And  after,  she 
founded  in  Bethlehem  an  abbey  in  which  she 
assembled  virgins  as  well  of  noble  estate  as  of 
middle  and  low  lineage,  and  departed  them  in  three 
congregations,  so  that  they  were  departed  in  work, 
in  meat  and  drink,  but  in  saying  their  psalter  and 
adoring  were  they  together  at  the  hours  as  it 
appertained^  And  she  induced  and  informed  all 
the  other  in  prayer  and  in  work,  by  example  giving, 
she  was  never  idle.  And  all  they  were  of  one 
habit,  and  they  had  ne  sheets  ne  linen  cloth  but  to 
dry  their  hands,  and  they  might  have  no  licence 
to  speak  to  men,  and  they  that  came  late  to  the 
hours,  she  blamed  debonairly  or  shordy,  after  that 
they  were,  and  suffered  not  that  any  of  them  should 
have  anything  save  the  living  and  clothing,  for  to 
put  away  avarice  from  them.  She  appeased  them 
sweetly  that  strove,  and  also  she  brake  and 
mortified  among  the  young  maidens  their  fleshly 
desires  by  continual  fastings,  for  she  had  liefer  have 
them  good,  suffering  sorrow  and  sickness,  than 


y Google 


4 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  their  heart  should  be  hurt  by  fleshly  will.  And 
she  chastised  them  that  were  nice  and  quaint, 
a me  saying  that  such  nicety  was  filth  of  the  sold,  and 
said  also  that,  word  sounding  to  any  ordure  or  filth 
should  never  issue  out  of  the  mouth  of  a virgin, 
for  by  the  words  outward  is  showed  the  counten- 
ance of  the  heart  within,  and  she  that  so  spake  and 
was  rebuked  therefor,  if  she  amended  it  not  at  the 
first  warning,  ne  at  the  second,  ne  at  the  third,  she 
should  be  dissevered  from  the  others  in  eating  and 
in  drinking,  by  which  she  should  be  ashamed,  and 
thus  should  be  amended  by  debonair  correction, 
and  if  she  would  not,  she  should  be  punished  by 
right  great  moderation.  She  was  marvellous  de- 
bonair and  pitiful  to  them  that  were  sick,  and 
comforted  them  and  served  them  right  busily,  and 
gave  to  them  largely  to  eat  such  as  they  asked, 
but  to  herself  she  was  hard  in  her  sickness  and 
scarce,  for  she  refused  to  eat  flesh,  how  well  she 
gave  it  to  other,  and  also  to  drink  wine.  She 
was  oft  by  them  that'  were  sick,  and  laid  the 
pillows  aright  and  in  point,  and  frotted  their  feet 
and  chauffed  water  to  wash  them.  And  her 
seemed  that  the  less  she  did  to  the  sick  in  service, 
so  much  less  service  did  she  to  God,  and  deserved 
less  merit,  and  therefore  she  was  to  them  pitiful, 
and  nothing  to  herself.  In  her  right  great  sick- 
nesses she  would  have  no  soft  bed,  but  lay  upon 
the  straw  or  upon  the  ground,  and  took  but  little 
rest.  For  the  most  part  she  was  in  prayers  both 
by  day  and  by  night,  and  she  wept  so  much 
that  it  seemed  of  her  eyes  a fountain.  So  many 
tears  ran  from  them,  and  when  we  said  to  her 
oft-times  that  she  should  keep  her  eyes  from  weep- 
ing so  much,  she  said : The  visage  ought  to  be 
like  to  be  foul  because  it  hath  so  much  been  made 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


5 


fair  and  gay  against  the  commandment  of  God,  and  The  Life 
the  body  ought  to  be  chastised  that  hath  had  so  ®;. 
much  solace  in  this  world,  and  the  laughings  ought  “uun 
to  be  recompensed  by  weepings,  and  the  soft  bed 
and  the  sheets  ought  to  be  changed  into  the  sharp- 
ness of  hair.  I that  was  accustomed  to  please 
man  and  the  world,  I desire  now  to  please  Jesu 
Christ.  And  what  shall  I say  of  chastity  in 
which  she  was  ensample  unto  all  ladies  of  time 
past  when  she  was  yet  secular  ? For  she  conversed 
in  such  wise  that  they  that  were  envious  durst  not 
avise  on  her  any  evil  fame.  She  was  debonair 
and  courteous  unto  all,  for  she  comforted  the  poor 
and  warned  the  rich  to  do  well,  but  in  largess  she 
passed  so  that  no  poor  man  complained  of  her. 

And  this  did  she  not  by  the  great  abundance  that 
she  had  of  goods,  but  by  her  wise  governance, 
and  when  I said  to  her  that  she  should  have 
measure  in  doing  alms,  after  that  the  apostle  saith 
that,  the  alms  that  is  done  to  another  be  not  grievous 
to  him  that  doth  it.  But  she  said  that  for  the  love 
of  our  Lord  she  did  all,  and  that  she  desired  to 
die,  begging  in  such  wise  that  she  should  not  leave 
one  penny  to  her  daughter  after  her,  and  that  she 
might  be  wrapped  in  a strange  sheet  when  she 
should  die. 

And  at  the  last  she  said : If  I should  demand 
ought,  I should  find  enough  that  would  give  to 
me,  and  these  beggars,  if  I gave  to  them  nought 
and  they  so  departed  and  died  for  poverty,  of 
whom  should  God  demand  this  ? Oft  said  she  so  : 

They  be  happy  that  be  merciful,  and  alms  quencheth 
sins  as  the  water  quencheth  the  fire,  but  for  to  do 
alms  it  cometh  not  always  to  perfection,  for  many 
do  alms  that  abide  in  their  carnalities,  they  seem  to 
be  good  without  forth,  but  within  they  be  mortal. 


y Google 


6 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Pauline 


Pauline  was  not  such  an  one,  she  afFeebled  her 
body  right  sore  in  fasting  and  in  labouring,  that 
unnethe  she  set  her  eyes  to  her  meat,  without 
eating  fish,  ne  milk,  eggs,  or  white  meat,  in  which 
many  ween  to  do  great  abstinence  without  eating 
flesh.  For  our  Lord  gave  to  her  an  adversary, 
the  stimulation  fleshly,  by  which  she  held  her  in 
humility  without  savouring  anything  of  pride  for 
the  foison  of  her  virtues,  and  also  that  she  thought 
not  to  be  higher  than  other  women.  She  had 
always  in  her  mind  the  holy  Scriptures  against  the 
deceptions  of  the  fiend,  and  especially  this  that 
Moses  saith : God  assayeth  you  if  he  love  you, 
and  this  that  saith  Isaiah  the  prophet : Ye  that 
have  been  at  the  solace  and  joys  of  the  world  and 
now  be  withdrawn  from  them  and  left  them,  look 
after  none  other  thing  but  to  suffer  tribulation 
upon  tribulation  and  know  ye  by  tribulation  is 
had  patience,  and  by  patience  is  had  poverty.  It 
is  said,  Job,  primo  capitulo,  when  it  was  showed  to 
him  the  loss  of  his  patrimony,  he  answered : I issued 
naked  from  the  belly  of  my  mother,  and  I shall 
re-enter  naked  again  into  the  earth,  like  as  God 
may  be  pleased  so  be  it  done,  his  name  be  praised 
and  blessed.  He  learned  us  that  we  should  not 
love  the  world,  for  the  world  shall  finish  in  her 
covetise.  When  one  told  her  that  her  children 
were  right  sick,  she  said : Who  loveth  his  son  or 
his  daughter  more  than  God  is  not  worthy  to  be 
with  God.  A man,  that  seemed  to  be  her  friend, 
sent  her  word  on  a time  that  she  had  great  need 
to  keep  well  her  brain,  for  because  of  the  ardour 
that  she  had  in  virtues,  she  seemed  to  be  out  of  her 
wit,  and  she  answered:  In  this  world  we  be 
reputed  as  fools  for  the  love  of  Jesu  Christ.  And 
our  Lord  said  to  his  apostles : The  world  hateth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


7 


you,  for  ye  be  not  of  the  world,  if  ye  were  of  the  The  Life 
world,  that  is  to  say  of  the  conversation  of  the  of  S. 
world,  the  world  should  love  you.  Fair  Lord  *>ai2^3ie 
God  we  mortify  ourselves  always,  and  we  be 
reputed  as  sheep  that  be  brought  to  death,  because 
that  without  plaining  we  mortify  our  bodies.  In 
such  patience  was  she  unto  the  death,  and  suffered 
humbly  the  envy  of  them  that  were  evil.  She  had 
in  her  mind  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  she  held  her 
more  to  the  spiritual  understanding  than  to  the 
histories  of  the  Scripture.  She  could  perfectly 
Hebrew,  Greek,  Latin,  and  French,  and  read 
coursably  the  Scriptures  in  these  four  languages. 

Who  may  recount  without  weeping  the  death  of 
this  woman  ? She  fell  in  a malady  mortal  and  saw 
well  that  she  should  die,  for  all  her  body  became 
cold,  and  she  felt  that  her  spirit  held  her  in  her 
breast.  Then  said  she  without  plaining,  and  with- 
out having  any  charge  save  to  God : F air  sweet 
Lord,  I have  coveted  the  beauty  of  thy  house  for 
to  be  in  thy  habitation  that  is  so  fair,  my  soul  hath 
desired  to  be  in  thy  realm.  And  when  I 
demanded  her  wherefore  she  spake  no  more,  and 
she  would  not  answer  me,  and  I asked  if  she 
suffered  great  pain,  she  said  to  me  in  Greek  tongue 
that  she  was  well  and  in  good  peace.  And  anon 
she  left  speaking  to  me,  and  closed  her  eyes  in 
saying  to  God : Lord,  like  as  the  hart  desireth 
to  come  to  the  fountain,  so  desireth  my  soul  to 
come  to  thee ; alas ! when  shall  I come  to  thee 
fair  Lord  God  ? And  in  saying  these  words,  she 
made  a cross  upon  her  mouth.  There  were 
bishops,  priests,  clerks,  canons,  and  monks  without 
number,  and  at  the  last,  when  she  heard  her  spouse, 

Jesu  Christ,  which  called  her  saying  : Arise  and 
come  to  me  my  sweet  love  and  fair  espouse,  for 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


8 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Julian 


the  winter  is  passed.  She  answered  gladly : The 
flowers  be  showed  in  our  country,  and  I believe 
that  I shall  see  the  goods  in  the  realm  of  heaven  of 
my  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  thus  she  rendered  her 
soul  and  passed  out  of  this  world.  And  anon  all 
the  congregation  of  virgins  made  no  cry  in  weeping 
as  do  the  people  of  the  world,  but  read  devoutly 
their  psalter  not  only  unto  the  time  that  she  was 
buried,  but  all  the  day.  and  all  the  night.  And 
with  great  pain  could  not  Eustochium,  her  vener- 
able daughter,  the  virgin,  be  withdrawn  from  her, 
but  she  kissed  her  and  embraced  her  piteously  in 
weeping  the  death  of  her  mother.  And  Jesus 
witnesseth  that  S.  Pauline  left  not  one  penny  to  her 
daughter,  she  had  so  given  alms  of  all  her  great 
riches.  Many  give  largely  for  God’s  sake,  but  they 
give  not  so  much  but  some  abideth. 

When  she  was  passed  as  said  is,  her  lips  ne  her 
face  were  not  pale,  but  was  as  reverent  to  look  on 
as  she  had  been  yet  alive.  She  was  buried  in  a 
sepulchre  in  Bethlehem  with  right  great  honour  by 
the  bishops,  priests,  clerks,  monks,  virgins,  and  all 
the  poor  people  of  the  country,  which  plained  that 
they  had  lost  their  good  mother  that  had  nourished 
them.  She  lived  in  Rome  holily  thirty-three 
years,  and  in  Bethlehem  twenty  years,  and  all  her 
age  was  fifty  three  years  seven  months  and  twenty 
days,  from  the  time  of  Honorius,  emperor  of  Rome. 
Then  let  us  pray  to  this  holy  woman  that  she 
pray  for  us. 

Here  followeth  of  S,  Julian , the  bishop , and first 
the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Julian  is  as  much  to  say  as  jubilus,  singing,  and 
ana,  that  is  on  high,  and  thereof  Julian  as  going  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


9 


high  things  in  singing.  Or  it  is  said  : Julius,  that  The 
is  as  much  to  say  as  not  wise,  and  anus,  that  is  old,  Jjif® 
for  he  was  old  in  the  service  of  God,  and  not  wise  ^ 
in  reputation  of  himself. 


The  Life  of  S.  Julian . 

S.  Julian  was  bishop  of  Cenomanence.  It  is 
said  that  it  was  he  that  was  said  Simon  the  leper, 
whom  our  Lord  healed  of  his  measelry,  and  bade 
Jesu  Christ  to  dinner,  and  after  the  Ascension  of 
our  Lord,  he  was  ordained  of  the  apostles  bishop 
of  Emmaus,  full  of  great  virtues.  He  appeared  to 
the  world,  he  raised  three  dead  men,  and  after  he 
ended  his  days  in  great  praising  of  God.  Of  this 
S.  Julian  some  say  that  this  is  he  that  pilgrims  and 
wayfaring  men  call  and  require  for  good  harbourage 
because  our  Lord  was  lodged  in  his  house,  but  it 
seemeth  better  that  it  is  he  that  slew  his  father  and 
mother  ignorantly,  of  whom  the  history  is  here 
after.  There  was  another  Julian  born  in  Alvernia, 
which  was  of  noble  lineage,  and  yet  more  noble  in 
faith  and  in  virtue,  which  for  the  great  desire  that 
he  had  to  be  martyred,  he  offered  himself  to  the 
tyrants  where  he  had  not  forfeited. 

Now  it  happed  that  Crispinus,  which  was  one 
of  the  governors  of  Rome,  sent  to  him  one  of  his 
ministers  for  to  put  him  to  death.  Anon  as  the 
minister  came  to  him,  he  issued  out  of  his  place 
and  came  tofore  him,  and  offered  to  him  to  suffer 
death,  and  his  head  was  smitten  off.  And  they 
took  the  head,  and  showed  it  to  S.  Feriol  that  was 
his  fellow,  and  said  they  would  so  do  of  him  if  he 
sacrificed  not,  and  because  he  would  not  obey  to 
them  they  slew  him,  and  took  the  head  of  S. 
Julian,  and  the  body  of  S.  Feriol,  and  buried  them 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


10 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  both  in  one  pit,  and  a great  while  after  S.  Mamer- 
°*  tiQe>  bishop  of  Vienne,  found  the  head  of  S.  Julian 
S*  J between  the  hands  of  S.  Feriol,  all  so  whole  as  it 
had  been  buried  that  same  day. 

Among  the  other  miracles  of  S.  Julian  it  is  said 
that  a deacon  took  all  the  white  sheep  that  were  of 
the  church  of  S.  Julian,  and  the  shepherds  defended 
them,  but  he  said  to  them  that  S.  Julian  ate  never 
no  mutton,  and  anon  after  a fever  took  him,  so 
great  and  hot  that  he  knowledged  that  he  was  of 
the  martyr  so  burnt,  and  he  did  water  to  be  cast 
on  him  for  to  cool  him.  And  anon  issued  out  of 
his  body  such  a fume  and  smoke,  and  therewith 
so  great  a stench,  that  all  they  that  were  present 
were  constrained  to  flee,  and  anon  after  he  died. 
Another  miracle  happed  of  a man  of  a village  that 
on  a Sunday  would  ear  his  lands,  and  when  he 
took  the  share  to  make  clean  his  coulter,  it  cleaved 
to  his  hand.  And  two  years  after,  at  the  prayer  of 
S.  Julian  in  the  church,  he  was  healed. 

There  was  another  Julian  which  was  brother  to 
one  named  Julius.  These  two  brethren  went  to 
the  Emperor  Theodosius,  which  was  a very  Chris- 
tian man,  and  they  prayed  him  that  they  might 
destroy  all  the  idols  that  they  might  find,  and  that 
they  might  edify  churches,  each  which  thing  the 
emperor  granted  them,  and  wrote  that  all  men 
should  obey  them  and  help  them,  upon  pain  to  lose 
their  heads.  Now  it  happed  that  they  edified  a 
church,  and  all  men  by  the  commandment  of  the 
emperor  obeyed  and  helped  them.  It  happed  that 
there  were  some  men  that  led  a cart  which  should 
pass  by,  and  thought  how  they  might  do  and  pass 
without  arresting  for  to  help  them,  and  they 
thought  that  one  of  them  should  lie  on  the  cart 
as  he  were  dead,  and  thereby  they  would  excuse 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


ii 


them,  and  so  they  did,  and  bade  him  that  lay  in  the  The 
cart  to  hold  his  eyes  closed  till  they  were  past  the  Life 
pass.  And  when  they  came  in  the  place  where  J'“la,1 
they  edified  the  church,  Julian  and  Julius,  his  brother, 
said  to  them : My  sons,  tarry  a while  and  come 
and  help  us  to  work.  They  answered  that  they 
might  not  for  they  carried  a dead  man.  S.  Julian 
said  to  them  : Why  lie  ye  so  ? They  answered : 

Sir,  we  lie  not,  it  is  so  as  we  say  to  you.  And  S. 

Julian  said  to  them : So  may  it  fail  to  you  as  ye 
say.  And  anon  they  drove  forth  their  oxen  and 
passed  forth.  And  when  they,  were  passed  a little 
they  called  their  fellow  that  he  should  arise  and 
drive  forth  the  oxen  for  to  go  the  faster,  and  he 
answered  not  one  word.  And  they  called  him 
again  on  high  and  said  : Art  thou  out  of  thy  wit  ? 

Arise  up  and  drive  forth  the  beasts,  and  he  moved 
ne  spake  not  one  word.  They  went  up  and  dis- 
covered him  and  found  him  dead  as  S.  Julian  had 
said  to  them.  Then  took  they  such  dread  and 
fear  that  after  that  they  ne  none  other  that  heard 
of  the  miracle  durst  lie  no  more  tofore  the  holy 
servant  of  God. 

Another  Julian  there  was  that  slew  his  father 
and  mother  by  ignorance.  And  this  man  was 
noble  and  young,  and  gladly  went  for  to  hunt. 

And  one  time  among  all  other  he  found  an  -hart 
which  returned  toward  him,  and  said  to  him, 
thou  huntest  me  that  shall  slay  thy  father  and 
mother.  Hereof  was  he  much  abashed  and  afeard, 
and  for  dread,  that  it  should  not  happen  to  him 
that  the  hart  had  said  to  him,  he  went  privily 
away  that  no  man  knew  thereof,  and  found  a 
prince  noble  and  great  to  whom  he  put  him  in 
service.  And  he  proved  so  well  in  battle  and  in 
services  in  his  palace,  that  he  was  so  much  in  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


12 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  prince's  grace  that  he  made  him  knight  and  gave 
IJfe  ofto  him  a rich  widow  of  a castle,  and  for  her 
• dower  he  received  the  castle.  And  when  his 

father  and  mother  knew  that  he  was  thus  gone 
they  put  them  in  the  way  for  to  seek  him  in  many 
places.  And  so  long  they  went  till  they  came  to 
the  castle  where  he  dwelt,  but  then  he  was  gone 
out,  and  they  found  his  wife.  And  when  she  saw 
them  she  inquired  diligently  who  they  were,  and 
when  they  had  said  and  recounted  what  was 
happened  of  their  son,  she  knew  verily  that  they 
were  the  father  and  mother  of  her  husband,  and 
received  them  much  charitably,  and  gave  to  them 
her  own  bed,  and  made  another  for  herself.  And 
on  the  morn  the  wife  of  Julian  went  to  the  church, 
and  her  husband  came  home  whiles  she  was  at 
church,  and  entered  into  his  chamber  for  to  awake 
his  wife.  And  he  saw  twain  in  his  bed,  and  had 
weened  that  it  had  been  a man  that  had  lain  with 
his  wife,  and  slew  them  both  with  his  sword,  and 
after,  went  out  and  saw  his  wife  coming  from 
church.  Then  he  was  much  abashed  and  demanded 
of  his  wife  who  they  were  that  lay  in  his  bed,  then 
she  said  that  they  were  his  father  and  his  mother, 
which  had  long  sought  him,  and  she  had  laid  them 
in  his  bed.  Then  he  swooned  and  was  almost 
dead,  and  began  to  weep  bitterly  and  cry,  alas ! 
caitiff  that  I am,  what  shall  I do  that  have  slain 
my  father  and  my  mother  ? Now  it  is  happened 
that  I supposed  to  have  eschewed,  and  said  to  his 
wife : Adieu  and  farewell,  my  right  dear  love,  I 
shall  never  rest  till  that  I shall  have  knowledge  if 
God  will  pardon  and  forgive  me  this  that  I have 
done,  and  that  I shall  have  worthy  penance  therefor. 
And  she  answered : Right  dear  love,  God  forbid 
that  ye  should  go  without  me,  like  as  I have  had 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


i3 


joy  with  you,  so  will  I have  pain  and  heaviness. 
Then  departed  they  and  went  till  they  came  to  a 
great  river  over  which  much  folk  passed,  where 
they  edified  an  hospital  much  great  for  to  harbour 
poor  people,  and  there  do  their  penance  in  bearing 
men  over  that  would  pass. 

After  long  time  S.  Julian  slept  about  midnight, 
6ore  travailed,  and  it  was  frozen  and  much  cold, 
and  he  heard  a voice  lamenting  and  crying  that 
said : Julian  come  and  help  us  over.  And  anon 
he  arose,  and  went  over  and  found  one  almost 
dead  for  cold,  and  anon  he  took  him  and  bare  him 
to  the  fire  and  did  great  labour  to  chauffe  and 
warm  him.  And  when  he  saw  that  he  could  not 
be  chauffed  ne  warm,  he  bare  him  in  to  his  bed, 
and  covered  him  the  best  wise  he  might.  And 
anon  after,  he  that  was  so  sick  and  appeared  as  he 
had  been  measell,  he  saw  all  shining  ascending  to 
heaven,  and  said  to  S.  Julian  his  host : Julian,  our 
Lord  hath  sent  me  to  thee,  and  sendeth  thee  word 
that  he  hath  accepted  thy  penance.  And  a while 
after  S.  Julian  and  his  wife  rendered  unto  God 
their  souls  and  departed  out  of  this  world. 

Another  Julian  there  was,  but  he  was  no  saint 
but  a cursed  man,  and  was  called  Julianus  Apostata. 
This  Julian  was  first  a monk,  and  showing  outward 
signs  of  great  religion  and  of  great  holiness,  after 
that  that  Master  John  Beleth  reciteth.  There  was 
a woman  that  had  three  pots  full  of  gold,  and 
because  the  gold  should  not  be  seen  she  had  put  in 
the  mouth  of  the  pots  above,  ashes,  and  delivered 
them  to  this  J ulian  tofore  other  monks  for  to  keep, 
whom  she  reputed  a holy  man,  but  she  said  not  to 
him  that  they  were  full  of  gold.  When  he  bad 
these  pots  he  looked  what  was  therein,  and  he 
found  that  it  was  gold  and  took  it  out  all,  and  filled 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Julian 


14 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


^ The  them  full  of  ashes,  and  fled  with  all  to  Rome,  and 
80  muc^  he  was  councillors  and 

b.  Julian  g0vernor8  0f  Rome.  But  the  woman,  when  she 
would  have  again  her  pots,  she  could  not  prove  that 
she  had  delivered  to  him  in  keeping  gold,  for  she 
made  no  mention  thereof  tofore  the  monks,  and 
therefore  he  retained  it,  and  procured  withal  the 
office  of  a consul  of  the  governance  of  Rome. 
And  after  that  he  procured  so  much  that  he  was 
instituted  emperor.  Whiles  he  was  young  he  was 
taught  in  the  art  of  enchantment  and  of  the  invo- 
cations of  fiends,  and  gladly  he  studied,  and  it 
pleased  him  much,  and  had  with  him  divers 
masters  of  that  science.  Now  it  happed  on  a 
day  that  as  his  master  was  out  he  began  alone  to 
read  the  invocations,  and  a great  multitude  of 
fiends  came  about  him  and  made  him  afeard,  and 


he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  anon  they 
vanished  away.  And  when  his  master  was 
returned  he  told  him  what  was  happed  to  him, 
but  his  master  said  to  him  that  always  he  had 
hated  and  feared  that  sign.  When  then  he  was 
emperor  he  remembered  thereof,  and  because  he 
would  use  the  craft  of  the  devil,  overall  where 
he  found  the  signs  of  the  cross  he  destroyed  them, 
and  persecuted  Christian  men  because  that  he  knew 
well  that  otherwise  the  fiends  would  not  do  for 


him.  Now  it  happed  that  he  descended  into  a 
region  that  is  called  Persia,  and  from  thence  he 
sent  into  the  Occident  a devil  for  to  have  answer  of 


that  he  said  to  him,  and  this  devil  went  and  abode 
ten  days  in  one  place  without  moving,  because  there 
was  a monk  continually  in  prayer  night  and  day, 
and  when  he  might  not  do  he  returned.  Then 
Julian  demanded  him  where  he  had  been  so  long, 
he  answered:  I have  been  in  a place  where  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


*5 


found  a monk  night  and  day  praying,  and  I The 
supposed  to  have  troubled  him  that  he  should  no  Life  of 
more  pray,  and  all  this  while  I could  never  turn  J01**11 
him  from  his  prayer,  and  thus  I am  returned 
without  doing  anything.  Then  Julian  the  apostata 
had  great  indignation  and  said  when  he  came 
thither  he  would  avenge  him  of  the  monk,  and 
when  he  went  in  to  Persia  the  devils  promised  him 
that  he  should  have  victory  of  a city.  The 
master  of  enchantments,  which  divined  by  the 
devil  for  him,  said  to  a Christian  man : What 
doeth  the  smith’s  son  ? He  said  that  he  made  a 
sepulchre  for  Julian  his  master.  And  as  it  is  read 
in  the  history  of  S.  Basil,  he  came  in  Caesarea  of 
Cappadocia  and  S.  Basil  came  against  him,  and 
presented  three  loaves  to  him,  which  he  sent  to 
him.  And  Julian  had  great  indignation  of  this  gift, 
and  for  the  bread,  he  sent  to  S.  Basil  hay,  saying : 

Thou  hast  sent  to  me  meat  for  dumb  beasts,  there- 
fore take  this  that  I send  to  thee.  S.  Basil  said : 

We  have  sent  to  thee  such  as  we  eat,  and  thou 
sendest  to  us  of  that  thou  nourishest  thy  beasts 
with.  Of  which  answer  Julian  was  wroth  and 
said:  When  I shall  have  done  in  Persia  I shall 
destroy  this  city  in  such  wise  that  it  shall  be 
better  ordained  for  to  ear  and  sow  than  people  to 
dwell  in.  And  the  night  ensuing,  S.  Basil  saw  in 
a vision,  in  the  church  of  our  Lady,  a great 
multitude  of  angels,  and  in  the  middle  of  them  a 
woman  being  in  a throne,  which  said  to  them: 

Call  to  me  Mercury  whom  Julian  the  apostata  hath 
slain,  which  blasphemeth  me  and  my  son.  Mercury 
was  a knight,  that  for  the  faith  of  God  had  been 
slain  of  Julian,  and  was  buried  in  the  same  church. 

Then  anon  Mercury  with  all  his  arms,  that  were 
kept,  was  present,  and  at  the  commandment  of  the 
VOL.  111.  b 


y Google 


i6 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  lady  he  went  to  battle.  S.  Basil  awoke  all  affrayed, 
otS.  and  went  to  the  tomb  where  the  knight  was  buried 
Ignatius  *n,  an(j  opened  the  sepulchre,  but  he  found  neither 
body  ne  arms.  Then  he  demanded  of  the 
keeper  who  had  taken  away  the  body.  And  he 
8 ware  that  in  the  even  tofore  it  was  there.  S. 
Basil  after  on  the  morn  returned,  and  found  the 
body  and  the  armour  and  the  spear  all  bloody. 
And  anon  came  one  from  the  battle  which  said 
that  Julian  the  apostata  and  emperor  was  in  the 
battle,  and  thither  came  a knight  unknown  all 
armed  with  his  spear,  which  hardily  smote  his 
horse  with  his  spurs  and  came  to  Julian  the 
emperor,  and  brandished  his  sword  and  smote  him 
through  the  body,  and  suddenly  he  departed  and 
never  after  was  seen  again.  And  yet  when  he 
should  die  he  took  his  hand  full  of  blood  and  cast 
it  into  the  air  saying : Thou  hast  vanquished  man 
of  Galilee  ! thou  hast  overcome  ! And  in  crying 
thus,  miserably  he  expired,  and  died  in  great  pain, 
and  was  left  without  sepulture  of  all  his  men. 
And  he  was  flayed  of  the  Persians,  and  of  his  skin 
was  made  to  the  king  of  Persia  an  undercovering, 
and  thus  he  died  cursedly. 

Thus  end  the  Lives  of  four  holy  saints  every  each 
named  Julian , and  of  one  that  was  a false  apostata . 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S • Ignatius  bishop , and first 
the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Ignatius  is  said  as  one  suffering  fire  and  burning, 
for  he  was  embraced  and  all  esprised  of  the  divine 
and  burning  love  of  God. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


17 


Of  S . Ignatius . 

S.  Ignatius  was  disciple  of  S.  John  Evangelist, 
and  was  bishop  of  Antioch.  And  after  that,  as 
some  say,  he  sent  a letter  unto  our  Lady  or  an 
epistle  in  this  wise : Unto  Mary  the  Virgin,  that 
bare  Jesu  Christ  in  her  body,  I,  humble  Ignatius, 
her  servant,  send  greeting,  I,  that  am  yet  a novice 
in  the  faith  and  disciple  to  Jesu  Christ  and  to 
John  thy  dear  friend,  desire  to  have  of  thee  some 
comfort  and  consolation  of  some  good  enseignment 
and  teaching.  For  of  Jesus  thy  Son  I have 
heard  say  many  marvels,  of  which  I am  enjoyed 
to  hear  only  of  thee,  which  hast  been  always  in 
his  company.  Thou  knowest  well  the  secret 
desires  of  him,  thou  hast  been  plainly  informed, 
and  they  that  be  yet  young  in  the  faith  with  me 
trust  much  to  be  endoctrined  of  thee,  and  informed 
in  their  creance  and  belief : Lady,  God  salute  thee. 

And  to  this  letter  answered  the  glorious  Virgin 
Mary  in  this  manner : Ignatius,  good  disciple  of 
Jesus  and  his  special  friend,  the  humble  handmaid 
of  Jesu  Christ  sendeth  to  thee  greeting.  I do  thee 
to  wit  that  all  that  John  hath  said  to  thee  of 
Jesu  Christ  and  all  that  thou  hast  learned  of  him 
is  true  doctrine  and  thing  certain.  Go  alway  in 
good  creance,  and  believe  and  keep  firmly  the 
promise  of  thy  Christian  faith,  and  do  thy  works 
according  to  the  same.  I shall  come  with  S.  John 
for  to  visit  thee  and  other  Christian  men  with  thee. 
Hold  thee  always  well  in  the  faith  and  in  good 
works,  and  let  no  persecution  ne  adversity  that  thou 
shalt  suffer  move  thee  from  thy  faith  ne  from  thy 
creance,  but  have  solace  and  affiance  in  Jesu  Christ 
thy  Saviour.  This  was  the  answer  of  his  letter. 

S.  Ignatius  was  a man  right  well  learned, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Ignatius 


IS 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  and  the  third  bishop  after  S.  Peter,  the  apostle 
of  S.  of  the  church  of  Antioch,  and  much  desired 
Ignatius  to  bo  a martyr  for  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ. 
It  happed  that  Trajan,  which  was  emperor  of 
Rome,  passed  by  Antioch,  to  whom  Ignatius 
showed  to  him  and  blamed  of  this,  that  he  perse- 
cuted Christian  men,  wherefor  the  emperor  did 
him  to  be  taken  and  put  in  irons,  and  in  that  wise 
by  ten  knights  to  be  led  to  Rome.  There  he  was 
presented  tofore  the  emperor  and  all  the  senators 
of  Rome,  and  was  constrained  by  promises,  by 
menaces,  and  by  torments,  many  and  great  and 
horrible,  for  to  adore  the  idols.  S.  Ignatius 
showed  to  them  clearly  that  their  gods  had  been 
thieves,  ribalds,  and  men  ot  abominable  and  evil 
life,  and  that  they  were  damned  in  hell,  and  that 
they  had  been  in  great  error  in  this,  that  of  so 
cursed  men  they  made  their  gods  and  worshipped 
devils,  and  had  forsaken  God  which  had  made 
and  created  all  the  world,  and  his  blessed  Son 
which  in  human  nature  had  redeemed  and  saved 
the  world. 

Finably,  after  this,  that  he  had  been  tormented 
by  lire,  and  by  beating  and  prison,  the  emperor  did 
send  for  the  Romans  in  a place  and  there  did  do 
set  S.  Ignatius,  and  did  do  bring  thither  two  lions 
for  to  devour  him.  But  he  had  never  dread  for 
death  ne  for  other  torments,  of  which  he  had  suf- 
fered many,  but  was  always  comforted  for  to  die 
for  the  love  of  Jesu  Christ.  And  he  said  at  the 
last : I am  wheat  of  Jesu  Christ,  which  ought  to 
be  grounden  between  the  teeth  of  these  beasts,  by 
which  I may  be  pure  bread  for  to  be  presented  to  my 
Lord ; and  anon  the  lions  came  and  strangled  him 
without  tearing  of  his  flesh,  or  anything  hurting  it, 
wherefor  Trajan  had  great  marvel  and  departed 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


19 


from  the  place.  It  is  read  that  S.  Ignatius  in  all  The 
his  torments  and  all  the  pains  of  martyrdom  that  Punfica- 
he  suffered,  that  his  tongue  never  ceased  to  name  ouj^Ladv 
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  when  they  that  tormented  7 

him  demanded  him  wherefore  he  named  this  name 
so  oft,  he  answered : Know  ye  for  certain  that  I 
have  in  my  heart  this  name  written,  and  therefore 
I may  not  leave  to  name  this  name  oft.  And 
because  hereof,  when  he  was  dead,  they  that  heard 
these  words  opened  his  body  and  drew  out  his 
heart  and  cut  it  open,  and  they  found  within  the 
name  of  Jesus  written  with  fair  letters  of  gold,  for 
which  miracle  many  received  the  faith  of  Jesu 
Christ. 

Of  this  saint  saith  S.  Bernard  upon  the  psalm, 

Qui  habitat : S.  Ignatius,  martyr  of  God  glorious, 
is  of  great  merit,  which  was  minister  to  the  disciple 
that  Jesus  so  much  loved,  and  in  his  epistles,  the 
which  he  sent  to  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary,  he 
saluted  her  as  mother  that  had  borne  Jesu  Christ, 
and  she  resaluted  him  again,  in  sign  that  he  was  a 
person  of  great  honour,  of  great  dignity,  and  of 
great  authority.  The  body  of  whom  was  honor- 
ably buried  of  Christian  men,  to  the  worship  of 
Jesu  Christ  which  is  blessed  in  secula  seculorum. 

Amen. 


Here  follonvcth  the  Purification  of  Our  Lady . 

Postquam  impleti  sunt  dies  purgationis  Marie 
secundum  legem  Moisi,  tulerunt  Jesum  in  Jeru- 
salem. Lucas,  cap.  ii.  The  ancient  law  had 
his  course  until  the  time  that  God  hath  suffered 
death  for  us.  And  when  he  died  on  the  cross  he 
said,  Joh.  cap.  xix.  Consummatum  est,  that  is  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


20 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  say:  All  thing  is  finished  and  ended  that  hath  been 
Punfica-  written  of  me.  Which  law  he  kept  during  his  life  ; 
our  Ladr  as  **  *8  wr*tten ; ^ am  not  come  for  to  break  the  law; 

J in  which  he  gave  us  example  of  humility  and  of 
obedience,  like  as  S.  Paul  saith.  In  like  wise  our 
Lady,  for  to  obey  to  the  law,  bare  her  sweet  son 
Jesu  Christ  unto  the  temple  of  Jerusalem  after  the 
fortieth  day  of  his  birth,  for  to  offer  him  to  God, 
and  for  to  give  offering  for  him  such  as  in  the  law 
was  ordained,  that  is  to  wit,  a pair  of  turtles  or  two 
doves  was  the  offering  of  poor  folk,  like  as  it  is 
written. 

Our  Lord,  which  in  all  case  came  to  make  our 
salvation,  deigned  not  only  to  humble  himself  and 
descend  from  his  realm,  and  became  man  mortal, 
semblable  to  us.  Also  he  deigned  to  be  born  of 
a poor  woman,  and  was  poor  for  to  enrich  us, 
and  draw  us  out  of  the  misery  of  this  world  to  the 
riches  permanable.  And  we  that  be  poor  because 
of  our  sins,  and  without  riches  of  good  virtues,  so 
worthily  should  we  come  and  be  at  the  feast  of  our 
Lord ; we  should  offer  to  him  that  which  by  the 
offering  is  signified.  The  dove  which  is  of  her 
nature  simple  and  without  gall,  and  the  turtle  natur- 
ally chaste,  for  when  she  hath  lost  her  mate  she 
will  never  have  other  mate,  and  with  that  she 
taketh  the  weeping  for  her  song  ; we  ought  to  offer 
to  our  Lord  instead  of  two  doves,  one  simple  will 
and  a good  intention,  without  retaining  in  our  heart 
any  gall  of  anger  or  of  hate  towards  our  neighbour ; 
for  as  our  Lord  saith,  if  thine  eye  be  simple  all  thy 
works  shall  be  in  light.  And  hereof  saith  S.  John 
the  Evangelist  in  the  Apocalypse : The  city  needeth 
no  sun  ne  moon  to  shine  in  it,  for  the  clearness  of 
God  shall  illumine  it,  and  his  lantern  is  the  lamb  ; 
the  lamb  is  the  light.  By  the  lamb,  which  is  simple. 


Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


21 


is  signified  to  as  a simple  conscience  and  righteous, 
which  maketh  true  judgment  of  the  intention,  for 
all  works  be  good  or  evil.  If  they  be  done  in  evil 
intention  or  by  hypocrisy  they  be  evil  and  without 
profit,  like  as  saith  Jesu  Christ : If  thine  eye  be  evil, 
all  thy  body  shall  be  dark.  By  the  eye  is  under- 
stood the  intention,  with  goodness  simple,  and 
debonairty  is  signified  by  the  doves.  We  ought 
also  to  offer  a pair  of  turtles  to  our  Lord,  that  is 
to  say,  a chaste  life  and  a very  intention  to  leave 
our  sin 8,  the  which  is  signified  to  us  by  the  chastity 
of  the  turtle,  and  by  her  weeping  the  contrition. 
As  Bede  saith  : Contrition  ought  to  begin  in  dread 
and  end  in  love ; for  the  soul  faithful,  when  she 
remembereth  her  sins  in  her  conscience,  she 
weepeth  for  the  dread  of  the  pains  of  hell  that 
she  hath  deserved,  and  thus  offereth  she  to  God  a 
turtle  ; and  when  she  hath  wept,  there  cometh  to 
her  a hope  to  have  mercy  and  pardon  of  her  sins, 
and  this  hope  is  conceived  of  dread  in  him  and  love 
of  God,  to  serve  and  to  be  in  his  company;  so  that 
soul  that  ought  to  sing,  weepeth  for  love,  which 
hath  delivered  her  so  soon  from  the  perils  and 
miseries  of  this  world,  and  for  to  come  to  the 
sweet  company  of  our  Lord.  And  thus  offered 
she  that  other  turtle,  in  weeping  with  David  the 
prophet  the  long  pilgrimages  that  she  hath  made 
in  the  miseries  of  this  world  saying : Heu  me  quia 
incolatus  meus  prolongatus  est ; for  when  she 
beginneth  to  think  after  the  joyous  company  of 
angels,  and  of  the  souls  that  be  in  heaven,  and 
what  joy  and  deduit  that  they  hare  in  the  over- 
desirous  sight  of  our  Lord,  then  all  the  world 
griereth  them,  and  they  desire  to  be  delivered  from 
the  faits  of  die  body  for  to  go  into  the  company 
of  these  holy  souls. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The 

Purifica- 
tion of 
our  Lady 


22 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  And  also  that  S.  Simeon,  which  by  revelation 
P«f*ca-of  the  Holy  Ghost  came  into  the  temple  of 
our  Lady  ^eru8a^em  in  th®  831116  hour  that  the  blessed 
9 Virgin  brought  her  dear  son  for  to  offer  him,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  had  showed  to  him,  that  tofore 
that  he  should  die  corporally  he  should  see  Jesu 
Christ  come  in  to  the  earth,  the  which  birth  he 
knew  long  before  to  be  showed  by  the  prophets. 
And  when  he  saw  Jesu  Christ  brought  into  the 
temple,  anon  he  knew  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
be  very  God  and  very  man,  and  took  him  between 
his  arms  and  said : F air  Lord  God  let  thy  sergeant 
and  servant  from  henceforth  be  in  peace,  and  suffer 
that  after  this  revelation  showed  to  me,  I may 
depart  and  die  for  to  be  delivered  from  the  evils 
of  this  world,  for  mine  eyes  corporal  and  spiritual 
have  seen  thy  blessed  son  Jesu  Christ,  which  shall 
save  the  creatures  human  from  their  sins ; the 
which  thou  hast  made  ready  and  ordained  tofore 
the  face  of  all  creatures  human,  for  to  be  light  to 
all  people  by  his  doctrine,  to  illumine  and  take 
away  darknesses ; that  is  to  say,  of  their  idolatry, 
after  this  that  Isaiah  the  prophet  hath  prophesied 
of  him : Populus  gentium  qui  ambulabat  in  tenebris, 
etc.,  the  people  of  gentiles  or  paynims  which  walked 
in  darkness  to  worship  idols  and  devils  for  very 
God,  saw  a great  light  when  they  issued  from 
their  sins  by  the  doctrine  of  Jesu  Christ  which 
came  also  to  the  glory  of  the  Jews,  for  they  received 
his  sight  bodily,  like  as  was  promised  them  by  tbe 
witness  of  the  prophets,  by  which  they  might 
glorify  them  of  this,  that  their  rightful  King  was 
born  among  them  and  conversed  bodily  in  their 
country.  And  S.  Simeon  said:  Nunc  dimittis 
servum  tuum  domine,  etc.  Sire,  let  thy  servant 
depart  in  peace  after  thy  word,  for  mine  eyes  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


*3 


seen  thy  health,  which  thou  hast  made  ready  tofore 
the  face  of  all  peoples,  that  is  light  to  the  revelation 
of  paynims  and  to  the  glory  of  thy  people  of  Israel. 
Jesu  Christ  is  called  peace,  health,  light  and  joy. 
Peace,  because  that  he  is  our  moyen  and  our 
advocate ; health,  for  he  is  our  redeemer;  light,  for 
he  is  our  informer ; and  glory,  for  he  is  our  governor. 
This  feast  is  called  Candlemas,  and  is  made  in 
remembrance  of  the  offering  that  our  Lady  offered 
in  the  temple  as  said  is,  and  every  each  beareth 
this  day  a candle  of  wax  burning,  which  repre- 
sented our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.  Like  as  the  candle 
burning  hath  three  things  in  it,  that  is  to  wit,  the 
wax,  the  wick,  and  the  fire,  right  so  be  three 
things  in  Jesu  Christ,  that  is  the  body,  the  soul  and 
the  godhead.  For  the  wax  which  is  made  of  the 
bee  purely,  without  company  and  mixture  of  one 
bee  with  another,  signified  the  body  of  our  Lord 
Jesu  Christ,  and  the  fire  of  the  candle  signified 
de  divinity  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  which 
illumined  all  creatures.  And  therefore  if  we  will 
appear  in  this  feast  tofore  the  face  of  God,  pure 
and  clean  and  acceptable,  we  ought  to  have  in  us 
three  dings  which  be  signified  by  the  candle 
burning  : that  is  good  deeds,  true  faith,  with  good 
works.  And  like  as  the  candle  without  burning 
is  dead,  right  so  faith  is  dead  widout  works  as  S. 
James  saitn,  for  to  believe  in  God  without  obeying 
his  commandments  profited  noding.  And  there- 
fore saith  Si  Gregory : The  good  work  ought  to 
show  widoutforth  that  dy  intention  abide  good 
widinforth  de  heart,  widout  seeking  widin  any 
vain  glory  to  be  allowed  and  praised.  And  by 
de  fire  is  understood  charity,  of  which  God  saith  : 
I am  come  to  put  fire  in  the  eard,  and  whom  I 
I will,  I will  burn; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The 
Purifica- 
tion of 
our  Lady 


24 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The 
Purifica- 
tion of 
our  Lad  y 


This  feast  is  called  the  purification  of  our  Lady, 
not  for  that  she  had  need  ne  ought  make  her 
purification,  for  she  was  pure  and  clean  without 
having  of  any  tatche  of  deadly  sin  ne  venial,  like 
as  she  that  had,  without  company  of  any  man,  by 
the  virtue  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  conceived  the  Son  of 
God,  and  was  delivered  without  losing  of  her 
virginity,  so  she  came  with  her  blessed  son  at  the 
fortieth  day  after  his  nativity  for  to  obey  the  com- 
mandment of  the  law,  after  the  manner  of  other 
women  which  had  need  of  purification,  and  also 
for  to  show  to  us  the  example  of  humility.  He  is 
very  humble  that  is  worthy  to  be  praised  for  his 
virtues.  This  glorious  Lady  is  queen  of  heaven 
and  Lady  of  angels,  nevertheless  she  is  pure  and 
humble  among  the  women  like  as  a poor  woman, 
without  making  any  semblant  of  her  great  humility, 
ne  of  the  high  majesty  of  her  son,  whereof  S. 
Bernard  saith  in  this  manner : 

O who  may  make  us  to  understand,  glorious 
Lady,  the  thought  of  thine  heart  that  thou  haddest 
among  the  services  that  thou  madest  to  thy  blessed 
son  in  giving  him  suck,  in  laying  down  and  raising, 
when  thou  sawest  a little  child  of  thee  born  on  that 
one  part,  and  of  that  other  side  thou  knewest  him 
to  be  God  Almighty  ? And  now  thou  believest 
and  seest  him  created  that  had  created  all  the  world, 
now  thou  seest  him  feeble  as  a child  which  is 
Almighty  and  all  puissant,  now  thou  feedest  him 
that  all  the  world  feedeth,  and  now  thou  seest  him 
not  speaking,  that  made  man  and  speech.  O who 
should  con  show  hereupon  the  secrets  of  thine 
heart  ? , How  savoured  thy  courage  when  thou 
heldest  thy  child  between  thine  arms  whom  thou 
lovedest  as  thy  Lord,  and  kissed  him  as  thy  son. 
Who  should  not  marvel  of  this  miracle,  when  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  25 

virgin  and  a clean  maid  hath  enfanted  and  childed  The 
her  maker  and  Lord  of  all  the  world?  To  him 
let  us  address  our  thoughts,  and  embrace  we  this 
child  of  one  very  belief,  whom  we  ought  to  love 
because  he  hath  humbled  himself  for  us,  and  to 
doubt  him,  because  he  is  our  judge  and  our  Lord, 
to  whose  commandments  we  owe  to  obey  if  we 
will  be  saved. 

We  read  an  example  of  a noble  lady  which  had 
great  devotion  in  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and 
she  had  a chapel  in  which  she  did  do  say  mass  of 
our  Lady  daily  by  her  chaplain.  It  happed  that 
the  day  of  the  purification  of  our  Lady,  her 
chaplain  was  out,  so  that  this  lady  might  that  day 
have  no  mass,  and  she  durst  not  go  to  another 
church  because  she  had  given  her  mantle  unto  a 
poor  man  for  the  love  of  our  Lady.  She  was 
much  sorrowful  because  she  might  hear  no  mass 
and  for  to  make  her  devotions  she  went  into  the 
chapel,  and  tofore  the  altar  she  kneeled  down  for 
to  make  her  prayers  to  our  Lady.  And  anon  she 
fell  asleep,  in  which  she  had  a vision,  and  her 
seemed  that  she  was  in  a church,  and  saw  come 
into  the  church  a great  company  of  virgins,  tofore 
whom  she  saw  come  a right  noble  virgin  crowned 
right  preciously.  And  when  they  were  all  set 
each  in  order,  came  a company  of  young  men 
which  sat  down  each  after  other  in  order  like 
the  other ; after,  entered  one  that  bare  a burden  of 
candles,  and  departed  them  to  them  above  first, 
and  so  to  each  of  them  by  order  he  gave  one,  and 
at  the  last  came  this  man  to  this  lady  aforesaid  and 
gave  to  her  also  a candle  of  wax-  The  which 
lady  saw  also  codie  a priest,  a deacon  and  a sub- 
deacon, all  revested,  going  to  the  altar  as  for  to 
say  mass.  And  her  seemed  that  S.  Laurence 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


26 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Tlie  and  S.  Vincent  were  deacon  and  sub-deacon,  and 
tionof^e811  ^rist  Priest>  and  two  angels  bearing 
our  Lady  to^ore  t^iem  candles,  and  two  young  angels  began 
the  introit  of  the  mass,  and  all  the  company  of  the 
virgins  sang  the  mass.  And  when  the  mass  was 
sung  unto  the  offering,  her  seemed  that  thilk 
virgin  so  crowned  went  tofore,  and  after,  all  the 
others  followed,  and  offered  to  the  priest,  kneeling 
much  devoutly,  their  candles.  And  when  the 
priest  tarried  for  this  lady  that  she  should  also 
have  come  to  the  offering,  the  glorious  queen  of 
virgins  sent  to  her  to  say  that  she  was  not 
courteous  to  make  the  priest  so  long  to  tarry  for 
her.  And  the  lady  answered  that  the  priest 
should  proceed  in  his  mass  forth,  for  she  would 
keep  her  candle  and  not  offer  it.  And  the 
glorious  virgin  sent  yet  once  to  her,  and  she  said 
she  would  not  offer  her  candle.  The  third  time 
the  queen  said  to  the  messenger : Go  and  pray 
her  that  she  come  and  offer  her  candle,  or  else 
take  it  from  her  by  force.  The  messenger  came 
to  this  lady,  and  because  in  no  wise  she  would  not 
come  and  offer  up  her  candle,  he  set  hand  on  the 
candle  that  this  lady  held  and  drew  fast,  and  she 
held  fast,  and  so  long  he  drew  and  haled  that 
the  candle  brake  in  two  pieces,  and  that  one  half 
abode  still  in  the  hand  of  the  lady  aforesaid, 
which  anon  awoke  and  came  to  herself,  and  found 
the  piece  of  the  candle  in  her  hand,  whereof  she 
much  marvelled,  and  thanked  our  Lord  and  the 
glorious  Virgin  Mary  devoutly  which  had  suffered 
her  that  day  not  to  be  without  mass.  And  all  the 
days  of  her  life  after  she  kept  that  piece  of  that 
candle  much  preciously,  like  an  holy  relic,  and  all 
they  that  were  touched  therewith  weTe  guerished 
and  healed  of  their  maladies  and  sicknesses.  Let 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


27 


us  pray  then  humbly  to  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary,  The 
which  is  comfort  to  them  that  forsake  their  sins, 
that  she  will  make  our  peace  to  the  blessed  Son 
and  impetre  and  get  of  him  remission  of  all  our 
sins,  and  after  this  life  to  come  to  the  glory  and 
joy  of  heaven,  to  the  which  bring  us  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  Amen. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S . Blase , and  first 
of  hts  name . 

Blase  is  as  much  to  say  as  glosing,  or  it  is  said 
as  belasius  of  bela,  which  is  habit,  and  syor,  which 
is  to  say,  little.  And  thus  he  is  said  glosing  by 
the  sweetness  of  his  word,  meek  by  his  habit 
of  virtues,  and  little  by  humility  of  manners  and 
of  conversation. 

S.  Blase  was  so  sweet,  holy  and  humble  in 
manners,  that  the  Christian  men  of  Cappadocia  of 
the  city  of  Sebaste  chose  him  to  be  a bishop. 
The  which  when  he  was  bishop  saw  that  Dio- 
cletian the  emperor  made  so  many  persecutions  to 
Christian  men  that  S.  Blase  sought  and  would 
dwell  in  an  hermitage  in  a ditch,  in  which  place 
the  birds  of  heaven  brought  to  him  meat  for  to  eat. 
And  it  seemed  to  him  that  they  came  to  serve  him 
and  accompany  him,  and  would  not  depart  from 
him  till  he  had  lift  up  his  hands  and  blessed  them. 
And  also  sick  men  came  to  him  and  anon  were 
cured  and  healed.  Now  it  happed  that  the 
prince  of  this  region  sent  his  knights  to  hunt,  and 
they  could  take  nothing.  But  by  adventure  they 
came  unto  the  desert  place  where  S.  Blase  was, 
where  they  found  great  multitude  of  beasts  which 
were  about  him,  of  whom  they  could  take  none, 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


28 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The 
Life  of 
S»  Blase 


whereof  they  were  all  abashed  and  showed  this  to 
their  lord,  the  which  anon  sent  many  knights  for 
him,  and  commanded  to  bring  him  and  all  the 
Christian  men  with  him.  And  that  night  Jesu 
Christ  appeared  to  him  thrice,  which  said  to  him : 
Arise  up  and  make  to  me  sacrifice.  Lo ! here  be 
the  knights  that  come  to  fetch  thee  at  the  com- 
mandment of  the  prince.  And  the  knights  said 
to  him : Come  out  from  this  place,  the  president 
calleth  thee.  And  S.  Blase  answered : My  sons, 
ye  be  welcome,  I see  now  well  that  God  hath  not 
forgotten  me.  He  went  with  them  and  continually 
preached,  and  did  many  miracles  tofore  them. 

There  was  a woman  that  had  a son  dying,  in 
whose  throat  was  a bone  of  a fish  athwart,  which 
estrangled  him,  and  she  brought  him  tofore  his 
feet,  praying  him  that  he  would  make  her  son 
whole.  And  S.  Blase  put  his  hand  upon  him 
and  made  his  prayer  to  God  that  this  child,  and 
all  they  that  demanded  benefits  of  health  in  his 
name,  that  they  should  be  holpen  and  obtain  it, 
and  anon  he  was  whole  and  guerished. 

Another  woman  there  was  that  was  poor  which 
had  a swine,  which  the  wolf  had  borne  away,  and 
she  humbly  prayed  to  S.  Blase  that  she  might 
have  again  her  swine.  And  he  began  to  smile 
and  said : Good  woman  anger  thee  not,  for  thou 
shalt  have  again  thy  swine,  and  anon  the  wolf 
brought  again  to  the  woman,  which  was  a widow, 
her  swine. 

And  anon  after  he  was  entered  into  the  city, 
the  prince  commanded  to  put  him  in  prison,  and 
after  another  day  he  made  him  to  come  tofore  him, 
whom  he  saluted  by  fair  words,  saying  to  him : 
Be  thou  joyful,  Blase,  the  friend  of  God.  S. 
Blase  answered  to  him : Be  thou  joyous  right 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


29 


good  prince,  but  call  not  them  gods  whom  thou  The 

worshippest,  but  fiends,  for  they  be  delivered  to 

fire  perdurable  with  them  that  serve  and  worship  ^ Blase 

them.  Then  was  the  prince  much  wroth,  and 

made  to  beat  S.  Blase  with  staves,  and  after  to 

put  him  in  prison.  Then. said  S.  Blase:  O mad 

man,  weenest  thou  by  thy  torments  and  pains  to 

take  away  from  me  the  love  of  my  God  whom  I 

have  with  me  and  is  my  helper  ? And  when  this 

good  widow,  which  by  S.  Blase  had  recovered  her 

swine,  heard  thereof,  she  slew  it,  and  the  head 

and  the  feet  with  a little  bread  and  a candle,  she 

brought  to  S.  Blase,  and  he  thanked  God  and 

ate  thereof,  and  he  said  to  her  that  every  year 

she  should  offer  in  his  church  a candle,  and  know 

thou  that  to  thee  and  to  all  them  that  so  shall  do 

shall  well  happen  to  them,  and  so  she  did  all  her 

life,  and  she  had  much  great  prosperity.  After 

this  that  the  right  cruel  prince  had  brought  him 

tofore  his  gods,  and  in  no  wise  might  make  him 

incline  for  to  adore  to  their  gods,  he  made  him  to 

be  hanged  on  a gibbet,  and  his  body  to  be  torn 

with  combs  of  iron,  and  this  done  he  was  remitted 

again  to  prison.  And  there  were  seven  women 

that  siewed  him,  which  gathered  up  the  drops  of 

his  blood,  which  women  anon  were  taken,  and 

constrained  to  sacrifice  to  their  gods.  The  which 

said : If  thou  wilt  that  we  worship  thy  gods,  and 

that  we  do  to  them  reverence,  send  them  to  the 

water  for  to  wash  and  make  clean  their  visages,  to 

the  end  that  we  may  more  cleanlier  worship  them. 

Then  the  prince  was  right  glad  and  joyous,  and 
anon  sent  them  to  the  water,  and  the  women  took 
them  and  threw  them  in  the  middle  of  the  stagne 
or  pond,  and  said : Now  shall  we  see  if  they  be 
gods.  And  when  the  prince  heard  this  he  was 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


3<> 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  out  of  His  wit  for  anger,  and  smote  himself  all 
Life  of  wroth  saying : Wherefore  retained  not  ye  our 
h.  Blase  g^g  that  they  should  not  have  thrown  them  in 
the  bottom  of  the  water  ? The  ministers  answered : 
Thou  spakest  shrewdly  to  the  women,  and  they 
cast  them  into  the  water.  To  whom  the  women 
said:  The  very  God  may  not  suffer  iniquity  ne 
falseness,  for  if  they  had  been  very  gods  they  had 
well  eschewed  that  they  had  not  been  thrown 
there,  and  had  seen  what  we  would  have  done. 
Then  the  tyrant  became  wroth  and  did  do  make 
ready  lead  molten  and  iron  combs,  and  seven 
coats  of  iron  burning  as  hot  as  fire  on  that  one 
side,  and  that  other  he  did  do  bring  smocks  of 
linen  cloth  and  said  to  them  that  they  should 
choose  which  they  would.  And  one  of  tiem  that 
had  two  small  children  ran  hardily  *nd  took  the 
smocks  of  linen  cloth  and  threw  them  in  the 
furnace  for  to  go  after  herself  if  she  hao  failed. 
And  the  children  said  to  the  mother,  leave  U6  not 
after  thee,  but  right  sweet  mother,  like  as  thou 
hast  nourished  us  with  thy  milk  so  replenish  us 
with  the  realm  of  heaven.  Then  the  tyrant  did 
do  hang  them,  and  with  hooks  and  crochets  of 
iron  did  do  tear  their  flesh  and  all  to-rent  it.  Of 
whom  the  flesh  was  as  white  as  snow,  and  for 
blood  they  gave  out  milk.  And  as  they  suf- 
fered these  great  torments  the  angel  of  God 
descended  from  heaven  and  comforted  them,  and 
said  to  them:  Have  ye  no  dread,  the  worker 
is  good  that  well  beginneth  and  well  endeth, 
and  who  deserveth  good  reward  shall  have  joy, 
and  for  his  work  complete  he  shall  have  his  merit, 
and  for  labour  he  shall  have  rest,  and  that  shall 
be  the  reward.  Then  the  tyrant  did  do  take 
them  down  and  did  do  throw  them  into  the  burn- 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


3i 


ing  furnace,  which  women,  by  the  grace  of  God  The 
issued  without  taking  harm,  and  the  lire  was  Life  of 
extinct  and  quenched.  And  the  tyrant  said  to  S*  Blase 
them,  now  leave  ye  your  art  of  enchantment  and 
adore  ye  our  gods.  And  they  answered : Do 
that  thou  hast  begun,  for  we  be  now  called  to  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Then  he  commanded  that 
they  should  be  beheaded ; and  when  they  should 
be  beheaded  they  began  to  adore  God  kneeling 
on  their  knees,  saying : Lord  God  which  hast 
departed  us  from  darknesses,  and  in  to  this  right 
sweet  light  hast  brought  us,  and  of  us  hast  made 
thy  sacrifice,  receive  our  souls,  and  make  us  to 
come  to  the  life  perdurable,  and  thus  had  they 
their  heads  smitten  off,  and  sith  their  souls  went 
to  heaven.  After  this  the  prince  made  S.  Blase 
to  be  brought  before  him,  and  said  to  him : Hast 
thou  now  worshipped  our  gods  or  not?  S. 

Blase  answered : Right  cruel  man  I have  no 

dread  of  thy  menaces,  do  what  thou  wilt,  I 
deliver  to  thee  my  body  whole.  Then  he  took 
him  and  did  him  to  be  cast  in  to  a pond,  and 
anon  he  blessed  the  water  and  the  water  dried  all 
away,  and  so  he  abode  there  safe.  And  then 
S.  Blase  said  to  him,  If  your  gods  be  very  and 
true  gods,  let  them  now  show  their  virtue  and 
might  and  enter  ye  hither.  Then  there  entered 
into  it  sixty-five  persons,  and  anon  they  were 
drowned.  And  an  angel  descended  from  heaven, 
and  said  to  S.  Blase : Blase  go  out  of  this  water 
and  receive  the  crown  that  is  made  ready  of  God 
for  thee.  And  when  he  was  issued  out  of  the  pond 
the  tyrant  said  to  him : Thou  hast  determined  in 
all  manners  not  for  to  adore  our  gods.  To  whom 
S.  Blase  said : Poor  caitiff,  know  thou  that  I am 
servant  of  God,  and  I adore  not  the  fiends  as  ye 

c 


VOL.  III. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


32 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  do.  And  anon  then  the  tyrant  did  do  smite  ofF 
of  S.  his  head,  and  S.  Blase  prayed  to  our  Lord  tofore 
Agatha  death  that  whosoever  desired  his  help  from 
the  infirmity  of  the  throat,  or  required  aid  for  any 
other  sickness  or  infirmity,  that  he  would  hear 
him,  and  might  deserve  to  be  guerished  and  healed. 
And  there  came  a voice  from  heaven  to  him 
saying  that  his  petition  was  granted  and  should 
be  done  as  he  had  prayed.  And  so  then  with 
the  two  little  children  he  was  beheaded  about  the 
year  of  our  Lord  three  hundred  and  eighty  seven. 


Here  follow  eth  the  Life  of  S.  Agatha^  and first 
the  interpretation  of  her  name . 

Agatha  is  said  of  agios,  which  is  as  much  to 
say  as  holy,  and  theos,  that  is  God,  that  is  to  say 
the  saint  of  God:  and,  as  Chrysostom  saith, 
three  things  make  a man  holy,  which  three  were 
perfectly  in  her;  that  is  cleanness  of  heart,  the 
presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  plenty  of  good 
manners.  Or  she  is  said  of  A,  which  is  to  say 
without,  and  of  geos,  earth,  and  of  theos,  God,  as 
a goddess  without  earth,  that  is  without  earthly 
love.  Or  she  is  said  of  aga,  that  is  to  say 
speaking,  and  of  thau,  that  is  perfection,  that  is 
that  she  was  speaking  and  accomplishing  much 
perfectly,  and  that  appeareth  well  in  her  answers. 
Or  she  is  said  of  agath,  that  is  service,  and  thaas, 
sovereign,  which  is  as  sovereign  service,  and  be- 
cause she  said  that  servage  ia  sovereign  noblesse. 
Or  she  is  said  of  aga,  that  is  solemn,  and  of  thau, 
that  is  perfection,  for  the  perfection  was  right 
solemn,  like  as  it  appeareth  by  the  angels  that 
buried  her. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


33 


Of  S.  Agatha . 


The  Life 
of  S. 


S.  Agatha  the  virgin  was  right  fair,  noble  of  Agatha 
body  and  of  heart,  and  was  rich  of  goods.  This 
glorious  virgin  served  God  in  the  city  of  Catania, 
leading  a pure  and  holy  life.  Quintianus  the  provost 
of  Sicily,  being  of  a low  lineage,  was  lecherous, 
avaricious,  and  a miscreant  and  paynim,  and  for 
to  accomplish  his  evil  desires  fleshly,  and  to  have 
riches,  did  do  take  S.  Agatha  to  be  presented 
and  brought  tofore  him,  and  began  to  behold  her 
with  a lecherous  sight ; and  for  to  have  her  him- 
self, he  would  have  induced  her  to  make  sacrifice 
unto  the  idols.  And  when  he  saw  her  firm  in 
her  purpose,  he  put  her  in  the  keeping  of  a woman 
named  Aphrodisia,  which  had  nine  daughters,  over 
foul,  like  unto  the  mother.  This  did  he  for  to 
induce  S.  Agatha  to  do  his  will  within  thirty 
days.  Aphrodisia  and  her  daughters  entreated 
the  holy  virgin  to  consent  to  the  will  of  the 
provost,  and  sometime  they  made  to  her  great 
promises  of  temporal  goods  and  of  great  eases, 
and  sometimes  they  made  to  her  menaces  of 
grievous  torments  for  to  suffer,  and  great  pains, 
to  which  S.  Agatha  answered  freely:  My  courage 
and  my  thought  be  so  firmly  founded  upon  the 
firm  stone  of  Jesu  Christ,  that  for  no  pain  it  may 
not  be  changed;  your  words  be  but  wind,  your 
promises  be  but  rain,  and  your  menaces  be  as 
rivers  that  pass,  and  how  well  that  all  these  things 
hurtle  at  the  foundement  of  my  courage,  yet  for 
that  it  shall  not  move.  In  this  manner  answered 
she,  and  alway  wept  in  making  her  prayers,  and 
much  great  desire  had  she  to  come  to  Jesu  Christ 
by  martyrdom  and  by  torments.  When  Aphrodisia 
saw  well  that  in  no  wise  she  would  be  moved, 


y Google 


34 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  she  went  to  the  provost  Quintianus,  and  said  to 
of  S.  him : Sooner  should  the  stones  wax  soft,  and 
Agatha  jron  turn  t0  80ft  ]eac^  than  turn  the  courage  of 
this  maid,  or  to  take  from  her  the  Christian  faith. 

I and  my  daughters  have  done  none  other  thing 
night  ne  day,  one  after  another,  but  to  labour  how 
we  might  turn  her  heart  to  your  consenting.  I 
have  promised  her  in  your  name  your  precious 
adornments,  clothes  of  gold,  houses,  lands,  towns, 
servants,  and  great  meinys,  and  all  this  she  de- 
spiseth  and  reputeth  them  at  no  value.  When 
Quintianus  heard  this,  anon  he  made  her  to  come 
tofore  him  in  judgment,  and  demanded  her  of  her 
lineage,  and  at  the  last  he  would  constrain  her  to 
make  sacrifice  unto  the  idols.  And  S.  Agatha 
answered  that  they  were  no  gods,  but  were  devils 
that  were  in  the  idols  made  of  marble  and  of 
wood,  and  overgilt.  Quintianus  said : Choose 
one  of  two  5 or  do  sacrifice  to  our  gods,  or  thou 
shalt  suffer  pain  and  torments.  S.  Agatha  said  s 
Thou  sayst  that  they  be  gods  because  thy  wife  was  " 
such  an  one  as  was  Venus,  thy  goddess,  and  thou 
thyself  as  Jupiter,  which  was  an  homicide  and 
evil.  Quintianus  said:  It  appeareth  well  that 

thou  wilt  suffer  torments,  in  that  thou  sayst  to  me 
villainy.  S.  Agatha  said:  I marvel  much  that 
so  wise  a man  is  become  such  a fool,  that  thou 
sayest  of  them  to  be  thy  gods,  whose  life  thou  ne 
thy  wife  will  follow.  If  they  be  good  I would 
that  thy  life  were  like  unto  theirs;  and  if  thou 
refusest  their  life,  then  art  thou  of  one  accord 
with  me.  Say  then  that  they  be  evil  and  so  foul, 
and  forsake  their  living,  and  be  not  of  such  life 
as  thy  gods  were.  Quintianus  said  : What  goest 
thou  thus  vainly  speaking?  make  sacrifice  unto 
the  gods,  or  if  thou  do  not  I shall  make  thee  to 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


35 


die  by  divers  torments.  S.  Agatha  abode  firm  The  Life 
and  stable  in  the  faith.  Then  Quintianus  did  do 
put  her  in  a dark  prison,  and  she  went  also  gladly, 
and  with  as  good  will  as  she  had  been  prayed  to 
go  to  a wedding. 

On  the  morning  Quintianus  made  her  to  be 
brought  tofore  him  in  judgment,  and  said  to  her  2 
Agatha,  how  art  thou  advised  for  thy  health? 

She  answered : Christ  is  mine  health.  Quintianus 
said : Reny  Christ  thy  God,  by  which  thou 
mayest  escape  thy  torments.  S.  Agatha  answered : 

Nay,  but  reny  thou  thine  idols  which  be  of  stones 
and  of  wood,  and  adore  thy  maker,  that  made 
heaven  and  earth,  and  if  thou  do  not  thou  shalt 
be  tormented  in  the  perpetual  fire  in  hell.  Then 
in  great  ire  Quintianus  did  her  to  be  drawn  and 
stretched  on  a tree  and  tormented,  and  said  to 
her : Refuse  thy  vain  opinion  that  thou  hast,  and 
thou  shalt  be  eased  of  thy  pain ; and  she  answered : 

I have  as  great  dilection  in  these  pains  as  he  that 
saw  come  to  him  that  thing  which  he  most  coveteth 
to  see,  or  as  he  that  had  found  great  treasure. 

And  like  as  the  wheat  may  not  be  put  in  the 
garner  unto  the  time  that  the  chaff  be  beaten  off, 
in  like  wise  my  soul  may  not  enter  into  the  realm 
of  heaven,  but  if  thou  wilt  torment  my  body  by 
thy  ministers.  Then  Quintianus  did  her  to  be 
tormented  in  her  breasts  and  paps,  and  commanded 
that  her  breasts  and  mammels  should  be  drawn 
and  cut  off.  When  the  ministers  had  accomplished 
his  commandment,  then  said  S.  Agatha:  Over 
felon  and  cruel  tyrant,  hast  thou  no  shame  to  cut 
off  that  in  a woman  which  thou  didst  suck  in  thy 
mother,  and  whereof  thou  wert  nourished?  But 
I have  my  paps  whole  in  my  soul,  of  which  I 
nourish  all  my  wits,  the  which  I have  ordained 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


3$ 

The  Life  to  serve  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  sith  the  beginning 
of  S.  0f  my  youth.  After,  Quintianus  did  do  put  her 
Agatha  jn  prjgon)  an(j  commanded  that  none  should  enter 
for  to  heal  her,  ne  none  should  give  to  her  meat 
ne  drink.  And  when  she  was  fast  closed  in  the 
prison,  there  came  an  ancient  noble  man,  and 
tofore  him  a child  bearing  a light,  and  divers 
ointments  in  his  hand.  This  noble  man  said  that 
he  was  a surgeon,  and  in  comforting  her  said : 
How  well  that  the  tyrant  hath  tormented  thee 
bodily,  nevertheless  thou  hast  more  tormented 
him  in  his  heart  by  thy  answers.  I was  there 
when  he  made  thy  paps  to  be  cut  off,  and  saw 
how  I might  well  heal  them.  Then  said  6he : 
I knew  never  of  medicine  corporal,  and  it  were 
shame  to  me  to  take  it  now.  That  which  I have 
avowed  and  kept  to  my  Lord,  sith  mine  infancy, 
yet  I shall  keep  it  if  it  please  him.  The  ancient 
nobleman  answered : I am  also  Christian,  and  a 
good  master  and  leech,  be  not  ashamed.  She 
answered  : Whereof  should  I be  ashamed  ? Thou 
art  ancient  and  of  great  age,  and  how  well  that 
I be  a young  maid,  nevertheless  my  body  is 
defeated  by  the  torments,  that  the  wounds  suffer 
nothing  to  enter  into  my  thought  whereof  I should 
be  ashamed,  and  not  for  but  I thank  thee  fair 
father  that  thou  art  so  diligent  to  heal  me,  but 
know  that  my  body  shall  receive  no  medicine  of 
no  man.  And  this  nobleman  said : Wherefore 
sufFerest  thou  not  me  that  1 may  heal  and  guerish 
thee  ? She  said : Because  I have  Jesu  Christ, 
my  Saviour,  which  with  a word  healeth  all,  and 
if  he  will  he  may  heal  me.  And  the  good  man 
smiling  said : And  he  hath  sent  me  hither  for  to 
heal  thee ; I am  his  apostle,  and  know  verily 
that  thou  art  whole  in  the  name  of  him,  and  anon 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  37 

the  apostle  vanished  away.  Then  she  fell  down  The  Life 
in  prayers  and  said : Lord  Jesu  Christ,  I yield  ^ S. 
thee  thankings  that  thou  hast  remembered  me,  and  a 
hast  sent  thine  apostle  S.  Peter  to  me,  which  hath 
comforted  me,  and  healed  my  wounds.  And  after 
the  orison  made,  she  saw  that  her  paps  were  again 
restored  to  her  and  all  her  wounds  healed.  And 
all  that  night  was  the  prison  fulfilled  with  great 
clearness  and  light,  so  that  the  keepers  fled  for 
the  great  dread  that  they  had,  and  left  the  prison 
all  open.  Then  said  to  her  the  other  prisoners 
that  were  in  the  prison,  that  she  should  go  their 
way,  and  she  said : That  shall  never  happen  that 
the  keepers  of  the  prison  shall  suffer  any  harm 
for  me,  ne  that  I shall  lose  my  crown ; I shall 
abide  in  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ  my  Lord,  which 
hath  comforted  and  healed  me. 

After  four  days  Quintianus  made  her  to  be 
brought  tofore  him  in  judgment,  and  said  to  her 
that  she  should  do  sacrifice  to  the  idols.  She 
answered:  These  words  be  vain,  and  thy  com- 
mandments evil,  they  make  the  air  to  stink,  he  is 
much  mechant  that  believeth  in  a stone  without 
entendment,  and  leaveth  our  Lord  the  very  God 
that  hath  healed  me,  and  hath  restored  to  me  again 
my  paps.  Quintianus  demanded  her  : Who  is  he 
that  hath  healed  thee  ? She  said  : Jesu  Christ. 
Quintianus  said:  Namest  thou  yet  Jesu  Christ? 

She  answered  t I shall  have  in  my  heart  Jesu 
Christ  as  long  as  I shall  live.  Quintianus  said: 

Yet  shalt  thou  see  if  he  may  help  and  heal  thee. 

And  then  he  made  her,  all  naked,  to  be 
rolled  upon  burning  brands,  and  anon  the  ground 
where  the  holy  virgin  was  rolled  on,  began  to 
tremble  like  an  earthquave,  and  a part  of  the  wall 
fell  down  upon  Silvain,  counsellor  of  Quintianus, 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


3» 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  and  upon  F astion  his  friend,  by  whose  counsel  she 
S.  had  been  so  tormented.  And  then  all  the  city  of 
Agatna  Catania  was  abashed,  and  the  people  came  running 
unto  the  house  of  Quintianus,  saying,  in  a great 
bruit,  that  the  city  was  in  a great  peril  for  the 
torments  that  he  did  to  S.  Agatha.  Quintianus 
redoubted  the  bruit  of  the  people,  and  went  out 
behind  and  commanded  that  she  should  be  remised 
in  prison.  When  she  came  into  the  prison  she 
joined  her  hands,  holding  them  up  to  heavenward, 
and  said  in  praying : Lord  God  Jesu  Christ  which 
hast  created  me  of  nought,  and  sith  my  youth 
hast  kept  me  and  hast  suffered  me  to  live  well 
in  my  youth,  which  hast  taken  from  mine  heart 
the  love  of  the  world  and  hast  made  me  to  over- 
come the  torments,  and  hast  lent  me  patience 
among  the  pains,  I pray  thee  that  thou  take  my 
spirit,  for  it  is  time  that  thou  make  me  to  depart 
from  this  world  and  to  come  to  thy  mercy.  This 
orison  and  prayer  made  she  on  high  tofore  many 
persons.  And  anon  after  she  gave  up  the  gho6t, 
and  rendered  her  soul,  the  year  of  our  Lord  two 
hundred  and  fifty-three  in  the  time  of  Decius,  the 
emperor  of  Rome.  After  this  the  Christian 
people  took  the  body  for  to  bury'  it  worshipfully, 
and  whiles  they  arrayed  it  with  ointments  for  to 
embalm  the  corpse,  anon  came  a young  man  clad 
in  silk,  and  well  an  hundred  that  followed  him, 
richly  clothed,  which  were  never  tofore  seen  in 
the  city,  ne  never  after  also.  This  young  man, 
whom  followed  the  fair  company,  set  him  on  that 
one  side  of  the  tomb  in  which  the  body  should  be 
put,  and  when  the  body  was  embalmed  within  the 
tomb,  this  young  man  set,  at  the  head  of  the  body, 
a short  table  of  marble  stone,  in  which  was  written 
this  scripture : Mentem  sanctam,  spontaneam, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


39 


honorem  deo  dedit  et  patriae  liberationem  fecit ; The  Life 
which  is  as  much  to  say  : The  holy  saint  Agatha  of  S. 
had  always  holy  thought  and  pure,  and  gave  honor  Agatha 
to  God  with  a free  will  in  all  her  works,  and  pur- 
chased by  her  prayers  peace  and  deliverance  to  all 
the  country.  After  that  the  table  containing  this 
scripture  was  set  at  her  head,  the  young  man  and 
all  his  company  departed  from  the  tomb,  being 
closed,  without  appearing  any  more  afterward, 
wherefore  it  is  supposed  that  this  young  man  was 
her  good  angel.  This  was  published  over  all, 
whereof  the  Jews  and  Saracens  began  to  sing  and 
worship  the  sepulchre  of  the  tomb  of  S.  Agatha. 
Quintianus,  the  provost,  died  of  an  evil  death  in 
the  way  as  he  went  for  to  seek  the  goods  and 
riches  of  S.  Agatha,  and  also  for  to  have  taken  her 
parents,  and  never  after  could  be  known  where 
her  body  became.  And  for  to  prove  that  she  had 
prayed  for  the  salvation  of  the  country,  at  the 
beginning  of  February,  the  year  after  her  martyr- 
dom, there  arose  a great  fire,  and  came  from  the 
mountain  toward  the  city  of  Catania  and  burnt 
the  earth  and  stones,  it  was  so  fervent.  Then 
ran  the  paynims  to  the  sepulchre  of  S.  Agatha  and 
took  the  cloth  that  lay  upon  her  tomb,  and 
held  it  abroad  against  the  fire,  and  anon  on  the 
ninth  day  after,  which  was  the  day  of  her  feast, 
ceased  the  fire  as  soon  as  it  came  to  the  cloth  that 
they  brought  from  her  tomb,  showing  that  our 
Lord  kept  the  city  from  the  said  fire  by  the  merits 
of  S.  Agatha.  To  whom  pray  we  that  she  by 
her  prayers  may  get  and  impetre  grace  of  our 
Lord  to  be  kept  from  all  perils  of  fire  in  this 
world,  and  when  we  shall  depart  hence  to  eschew 
the  perpetual  fire,  and  to  come  to  the  glory  and  joy 
in  heaven.  Amen. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Of  S . Amande , and  first  the  interpretation 
of  his  name . 

Amande  is  as  much  to  say  as  amiable,  for  he 
had  in  him  three  things  that  make  a man  amiable. 
The  first  is  to  be  courteous  and  gracious  in  com- 
pany, as  Solomon  saith  in  his  Proverbs  the  nine- 
teenth chapter : Vir  amabilis  ad  societatem.  The 
second  is  to  be  honest  in  conversation,  as  it  is  said 
of  Esther,  Esther  secundo.  Quod  omnibus  oculis 
amabilis  videbatur : The  third  is  to  be  virtuous  in 
faith  of  prowesse,  as  it  is  said  in  the  book  of 
Paralipomenon  the  second  chapter : Saul  and 
Jonathas  amabiles  et  decori. 

Of  the  Life  of  S.  Amande . 

S.  Amande  was  born  of  noble  father  and  mother. 
On  a time  he  entered  into  a monastery,  and,  as  he 
walked  and  went  in  the  church,  he  found  a great 
serpent,  whom  by  the  virtue  of  his  prayer  and  with 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  made  him  to  issue  out 
and  to  enter  into  the  great  pit  out  of  which 
he  never  issued  after*  And  after  S.  Amande 
came  to  the  sepulchre  of  S.  Martin  and  there 
abode  fifteen  years,  where  he  lived  with  barley 
bread  and  water,  and  ware  always  the  hair. 
After  that  he  went  to  Rome  and  went  into  the 
church  of  S.  Peter,  and  abode  there  by  night. 
The  keeper  of  the  church  put  him  out  right 
rudely ; and  S.  Peter  appeared  to  him  as  he  lay 
and  slept  tofore  the  church  door,  and  sent  him  in 
legation  into  France,  where  he  found  the  king  of 
Dagobert,  the  which  he  reproved  strongly  of  his 
sins.  The  king  was  angry  and  put  him  out  of  his 
realm.  After,  when  the  king  had  no  son  he  made 


40 

The  Life 
of  S. 
Amande 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


4i 


his  prayers  to  God  that  he  might  have  one,  and  The  Life 
God  sent  him  one,  and  when  he  was  born,  he  of  S. 
thought  much,  and  sorrowed  who  should  baptize  Amande 
him,  and  it  came  into  his  mind  that  he  would  that 
S.  Amande  should  baptize  him.  S.  Amande  was 
sought  and  brought  to  the  king,  and  as  soon  as  he 
was  come,  the  king  fell  down  to  his  feet  and 
prayed  him  that  he  would  pardon  him  of  that  he 
had  trespassed  to  him,  and  that  he  would  baptize 
his  son.  And  S.  Amande  granted  benignly  to 
the  king  his  request,  the  first  petition,  but  not  the 
second  request,  for  he  dreaded  that  he  would  have 
desired  about  some  worldly  occupation  or  secular 
things,  of  which  he  would  not  gladly  intermeddle, 
and  went  his  way  and  departed ; but  at  the  last,  as 
vanquished  by  the  prayers  of  the  king,  he  granted 
him.  And  thus  then  as  he  baptized  the  child, 
and  no  man  answered,  the  child  with  a clear  voice 
said  and  answered  : Amen.  And  after  this  the 
king  promoted  him  to  be  bishop  of  Sens.  And 
when  he  saw  that  the  word  of  God  in  predication 
was  despised  and  not  set  by,  he  went  into 
Gascony,  where  he  saw  a juggler  who  mocked  his 
words.  The  fiend  took  him,  and  with  his  own 
teeth  he  tare  him,  and  confessed  that  he  had  done 
injury  to  the  person  of  God,  and  anon  died  miser- 
ably. 

Now  it  happed  on  a time  that  he  washed  his 
hands,  and  a bishop  made  the  water  to  be  kept, 
of  which  water  a blind  man  had  his  sight  again. 

It  happed  that  in  that  place,  by  the  will  of  the  king, 
he  would  edify  a monastery  of  monks;  then  a 
bishop  that  was  of  the  next  city  took  it  grievously 
and  was  much  angry  therewith,  and  commanded 
his  servants  to  cast  him  out  or  else  they  should 
slay  him.  And  anon  they  came  to  him  and  said 


Digitized  by  Google 


42 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  to  him,  in  guile  and  treason,  that  he  should  go 
S.  With  them  and  they  would  show  to  him  a place 
Veoaste  ^4  good,  and  water  enough,  for  to  edify  upon 
a monastery  for  monks.  And  he  that  knew  their 
malice  and  their  evil  purpose  went  with  them  unto 
the  top  of  an  high  mountain  whereas  they  would 
have  slain  him,  and  he  desired  much  the  martyr- 
dom for  the  love  of  our  Lord,  and  for  to  come  in 
his  company ; but  anon  suddenly  descended  from 
heaven  such  a tempest  of  rain  and  of  orage,  that 
it  covered  all  the  mountain  so  much  that  that  one 
could  not  see  that  other,  and  supposed  to  have 
died  suddenly.  And  they  fell  down  to  the  earth 
upon  their  knees,  praying  him  to  pardon  them, 
and  that  they  might  depart  thence  alive.  For 
whom  he  put  himself  to  prayer,  and  anon  the 
storm  was  appeased  and  the  weather  fair.  They 
went  to  their  place,  and  S.  Amande  thus  escaped 
from  this  peril.  And  many  other  miracles  he 
showed  and  did  in  the  honour  of  our  Lord,  and 
finished  in  holy  virtues  his  life,  and  departed  out 
of  this  world  in  the  time  of  E radius,  the 
emperor,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  six  hundred 
and  fifty-three. 


Here  next  followeth  the  Life  of  S,  Vedaste . 

S.  Vedaste  was  ordained  Bishop  of  Arras  by 
the  hand  of  S.  Remigius.  And  S.  Vedaste  was 
of  much  great  holiness  and  cleanness:  for  when 
he  came  to  the  gate  of  Arras  he  found  there  two 
poor  men  of  whom  that  one  was  lame  and  that 
other  blind.  These  two  poor  men  demanded  of 
him  some  alms.  And  S.  Vedaste  answered  to 
them  and  said : I have  neither  gold  nor  silver,  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


43 


this  that  I have  I give  to  you.  Then  he  made  The  Life 

them  both  whole  by  virtue  of  his  prayer.  It 
i , . 3 . , ,r  i , valentine 

happed  on  a time  he  came  into  a church  destroyed, 

and  found  there  a wolf  among  the  bushes;  and 
he  commanded  him  that  he  should  go  his  way, 
and  anon  he  obeyed  to  him  and  fled,  so  that  sith 
that  time  he  was  not  seen.  At  the  last,  when  he 
had  converted  much  people,  by  his  word  and  pre- 
dication, to  the  faith  of  God,  and  also  by  good 
ensamples  showed  evidently  to  the  people,  in  the 
fortieth  year  of  his  bishopric,  he  saw  a dove  of 
Are  that  came  from  heaven  to  his  house.  And 
by  that  he  understood  well  that  he  should  finish 
and  pass  out  of  this  world,  and  so  he  did,  for  he 
died  anon  after,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  five 
hundred  and  fifty.  When  his  body  should  be 
translated,  S.  Omer  which  was  blind  for  age,  was 
sorry  that  he  might  not  see  the  body  of  S.  Vedaste 
and  anon  our  Lord  enlumined  him,  and  rendered 
to  him  his  sight.  And  he  saw  the  body  of  S. 

Vedaste,  but  anon  after,  he  was  blind  again  as  he 
had  been  tofore.  Let  us  pray  to  him,  etc. 


Here  beginncth  the  Life  of  S.  Valentine , and first  the 
interpretation  of  his  name . 

Valentine  is  as  much  to  say  as  containing  valour 
that  is  perseverant  in  great  holiness.  Valentine 
is  said  also  as  a valiant  knight,  for  he  was  a right 
noble  knight  of  God,  and  the  knight  is  said  valiant 
that  fleeth  not,  and  smiteth  and  defendeth  valiantly 
and  over cometh  much  puissantly.  And  so  S. 
Valentine  withdrew  him  not  from  his  martyrdom 
in  fleeing,  he  smote  in  destroying  the  idols,  he 
defended  the  faith,  he  overcame  in  suffering. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


44 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Valentine 


Of  S.  Valentine  the  Martyr . 

S.  Valentine,  friend  of  our  Lord  and  priest  of 
great  authority,  was  at  Rome.  It  happed  that 
Claudius  the  emperor  made  him  to  come  tofore 
him  and  said  to  him  in  demanding : What  thing 
is  that  which  I have  heard  of  thee,  Valentine  ? 
Why  wilt  thou  not  abide  in  our  amity,  and 
worship  the  idols  and  renounce  the  vain  opinion 
of  thy  creance  ? S.  Valentine  answered  him  2 If 
thou  hadst  very  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  Jesu 
Christ  thou  shouldest  not  say  this  that  thou 
sayest,  but  shouldest  reny  the  idols  and  worship 
very  God.  Then  said  to  S.  Valentine  a prince 
which  was  of  the  council  of  the  emperor : What 
wilt  thou  say  of  our  gods  and  of  their  holy  life  ? 
And  S.  Valentine  answered : I say  none  other 
thing  of  them  but  that  they  were  men  mortal  and 
mechant  and  full  of  all  ordure  and  evil.  Then 
said  Claudius  the  emperor : If  Jesu  Christ  be  God 
verily,  wherefore  sayst  thou  not  the  truth  ? And 
S.  Valentine  said:  Certainly  Jesu  Christ  is  only 
very  God,  and  if  thou  believe  in  him,  verily  thy 
soul  shall  be  saved,  thy  realm  shall  multiply,  and 
he  shall  give  to  thee  alway  victory  of  thine 
enemies.  Then  Claudius  turned  him  unto  all 
them  that  were  there,  and  said  to  them : Lords, 
Romans,  hear  ye  how  wisely  and  reasonably  this 
man  speaketh  ? Anon  the  provost  of  the  city 
said : The  emperor  is  deceived  and  betrayed,  how 
may  we  leave  that  which  we  have  holden  and  been 
accustomed  to  hold  sith  our  infancy  ? With  these 
words  the  emperor  turned  and  changed  his  courage, 
and  S.  Valentine  was  delivered  in  the  keeping  of 
theprovost. 

When  S.  Valentine  was  brought  in  an  house  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


45 


prison,  then  he  prayed  to  God,  saying : Lord  The  Life 
Jesu  Christ  very  God,  which  art  very  light,  of  S. 
enlmmine  this  house  in  such  wise  that  they  that  Juliana 
dwell  therein  may  know  thee  to  be  very  God. 

And  the  provost  said:  I marvel  me  that  thou 
sayest  that  thy  God  is  very  light,  and  nevertheless, 
if  he  may  make  my  daughter  to  hear  and  see, 
which  long  time  hath  been  blind,  I shall  do  all 
that  thou  commande8t  me,  and  shall  believe  in 
thy  God.  S.  Valentine  anon  put  him  in  prayers, 
and  by  his  prayers  the  daughter  of  the  provost 
received  again  her  sight,  and  anon  all  they  of  the 
the  house  were  converted.  After,  the  emperor 
did  do  smite  off  the  head  of  S.  Valentine,  the 
year  of  our  Lord  two  hundred  and  eighty.  Then 
let  us  pray  to  S.  Valentine  that  he  get  us  pardon 
of  our  sins.  Amen. 

Here  follonveth  the  Life  of  S.  Juliana , and first  the 
interpretation  of  her  name . 

Juliana  is  as  much  to  say  as  burning  plainly,  for 
she  burnt  herself  against  the  temptation  of  the 
devil  which  would  have  deceived  her,  and  she 
helped  many  others  to  believe  in  the  faith  of  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ. 


Of  S.  Juliana . 

S.  Juliana  was  given  in  marriage  to  the  provost 
of  Nicomedia,  which  was  named  Eulogius,  and  he 
was  a paynim,  and  therefore  she  would  not  assent 
to  the  marriage,  ne  assemble  with  him,  but  if  he 
would  first  take  the  faith  of  Christ  and  be  baptized. 
When  her  father  saw  this,  anon  he  did  do  her  to 
be  naked,  and  made  her  to  be  beaten  sore,  and 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


46  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  Life  after  delivered  her  to  the  provost.  And  after 
ofS.  when  the  provost  beheld  her,  and  saw  the  great 
Juliana  beauty  jn  her,  he  said  to  her  2 My  most  sweet 
Juliana,  why  hast  thou  brought  me  in  such  con- 
fusion that  I am  mocked  because  thou  refiisest  to 
take  me  ? She  said  : If  thou  wilt  adore  my  God, 

I shall  assent  and  agree  to  take  thee,  and  other- 
wise shalt  thou  never  be  my  lord.  To  whom  the 
provost  said : F air  lady,  that  may  I not  do,  for 
the  emperor  should  then  smite  off  my  head.  Ajid 
she  said : If  thou  doubtest  so  much  the  emperor, 
which  is  mortal,  why  should  not  I doubt  mine 
emperor  Jesu  Christ,  which  is  immortal  5 do  what 
thou  wilt,  for  thou  mayst  not  deceive  me.  Then 
the  provost  did  do  her  to  be  beat  most  cruelly 
with  rods,  and  half  a day  to  hang  by  the  hairs 
of  her  head,  and  molten  lead  to  be  cast  on  her 
head.  And  when  he  saw  that  all  this  grieved  | 
her  not,  he  made  her  to  be  bounden  in  chains,  and 
to  be  set  in  prison.  To  whom  the  devil  came 
then  in  the  likeness  of  an  angel,  which  said  to  her 
in  this  manner : Juliana,  I am  the  angel  of  God, 
which  hath  sent  me  to  thee  to  warn  thee  and  say 
that  thou  make  sacrifice  to  the  idols  for  to  escape 
the  torments  of  evil  death.  Then  she  began  to 
weep,  and  made  to  God  this  prayer : Lord  God, 
suffer  not  me  to  be  lost,  but  of  thy  grace  show  to 
me  what  he  is  that  maketh  to  me  this  monition. 
The  same  time  came  to  her  a voice  that  said  that 
she  should  set  hand  on  him,  and  that  she  constrain 
him  to  confess  what  he  was,  and  anon  she  took 
him  and  demanded  him,  and  he  said  that  he  was 
the  devil,  and  that  his  father  had  sent  him  thither 
for  to  deceive  her.  She  demanded  him : Who  is 
thy  father  ? And  he  answered : Beelzebub,  which 
sendeth  us  for  to  do  all  evil,  and  maketh  us 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


47 


grievously  to  be  beaten  when  we  come  vanquished 
of  the  Christian  people.  And  therefore  I am 
certain  I shall  have  much  harm  because  I may 
not  overcome  thee.  She  said  to  him  : Of  what 
craft  is  thy  father  Beelzebub  ? The  devil  said : 
He  contriveth  all  evil,  and  when  we  come  into 
hell  he  sendeth  us  for  to  tempt  the  souls  of  the 
people.  She  demanded : What  torments  suffereth 
he  that  cometh  vanquished  of  a Christian  creature  ? 
The  devil  said:  We  suffer  then  much  grievous 
torment,  and  by  cause  when  we  be  vanquished  of 
a good  man  we  dare  not  return,  and  when  we  be 
sought  and  cannot  be  found,  then  commandeth  our 
master  to  other  devils  that  they  torment  us  where- 
somever  they  find  us,  and  therefore  we  must  obey 
to  him  as  to  our  father.  And  of  what  craft  art 
thou?  I take  solace  in  the  shrewdness  of  the 
people ; I love  homicide,  luxury,  battle,  and  make 
debate  and  war.  And  she  demanded  him  : Goest 
thou  never  to  do  good  works  and  profitable  ? The 
devil  answered : Madam,  to  the  end  that  I answer 
the  truth,  to  my  right  great  harm  and  evil  am 
I come  hither,  for  I had  well  supposed  to  have 
deceived  thee,  and  made  thee  to  make  sacrifice 
to  the  idols  and  to  renounce  thy  God.  When  we 
come  to  a good  Christian  man  and  we  find  him 
ready  to  do  service  to  God,  we  send  into  him 
many  thoughts  vain  and  evil,  and  also  many  evil 
desires,  and  turn  his  thought  by  this  that  we  set 
tofore  him,  and  we  send  errors  into  his  thoughts, 
and  we  let  him  not  persevere  in  his  orisons  ne  in 
no  good  works ; yet  if  we  see  any  that  will  go  to 
the  church  or  in  other  place  for  any  good,  anon 
we  be  in  their  ways,  and  cast  into  their  hearts 
divers  thoughts  and  occasions  by  which  they  be 
distorned  for  to  do  well.  But  whosomever  may 

VOL.  III.  D 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  a 
Juliana 


48 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  understand  our  temptations  and  apperceive  them, 
of  S.  to  the  end  that  he  put  away  from  him  evil  cogita- 
Juliana  tjon8  anj  thoughts,  and  will  make  his  prayers,  and 
do  his  good  works,  and  hear  the  words  of  God 
and  the  divine  service,  of  him  we  be  cast  out,  and 
when  they  receive  the  body  of  Jesu  Christ  we 
depart  forthwith  from  them.  We  set  our  intent 
to  nothing  but  to  deceive  good  persons  that  lead 
an  holy  life,  and  when  we  see  them  do  good 
works,  we  send  into  them  bitter  and  grievous 
thoughts  for  to  leave  all  and  do  our  will.  S. 
Juliana  said:  O thou  spirit!  how  art  thou  so 
hardy  to  tempt  any  Christian  person?  And  the 
devil  answered : How  darest  thou  thus  hold  me, 
if  it  were  not  thou  affiest  in  Jesu  Christ  ? Right 
so  trust  I in  my  father,  which  is  a malefactor,  and 
I do  that  pleaseth  him ; I have  pained  me  to  do 
oft  many  evils,  and  sometime  I come  to  mine 
intent,  and  accomplish  my  desire,  but  at  this  time 
I have  failed  : I would  I had  not  come  hither ! 
Alas!  how  understood  my  father  of  this  that 
should  not  hap.  Madam,  let  me  go,  and  give  me 
leave  to  go  in  to  some  other  place,  for  it  is  no 
need  that  I accuse  thee  to  my  father.  At  the 
last  she  let  him  go. 

On  the  morn  the  provost  commanded  that  S. 
Juliana  should  be  brought  tofore  him  in  judgment ; 
and  when  he  saw  her  so  well  guerished,  and  her 
visage  so  fair  and  so  shining,  then  said  the  provost 
to  her : Juliana,  who  hath  taught  thee,  and  how 
mayest  thou  vanquish  the  torments?  And  she 
said : Hearken  to  me  and  I shall  say  to  thee  : 
My  Lord  Jesu  Christ  hath  taught  me  to  adore 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  I 
have  overcome  and  vanquished  Satan  thy  father, 
and  all  his  other  devils ; for  God  hath  sent  his 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


49 


angel  for  to  comfort  and  to  help  me.  Mechant  The  Life 
man,  knowest  thou  not  that  the  torments  be  made  S. 
ready  for  thee  everlasting,  where  thou  shalt  be  Juliana 
tormented  perpetually  in  a perpetual  darkness  and 
obscurity.  Anon  the  provost  made  to  be  brought 
a wheel  of  iron  between  two  pillars,  and  four 
horses  to  draw  it  forth,  and  four  knights  at  one 
side,  and  four  knights  on  that  other  to  draw,  and 
four  for  to  draw  forth  the  wheel,  so  that  all  the 
body  was  tobroken  in  such  wise  that  the  marrow 
came  out  of  the  bones,  and  the  wheel  was  all 
bloody.  Then  came  an  angel  of  God  and  brake 
the  wheel,  and  healed  the  wounds  of  S.  Juliana 
perfectly.  And  for  this  miracle  were  converted 
all  they  that  were  present.  And  anon  after,  for 
the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ  were  beheaded  men  and 
women  to  the  number  of  one  hundred  and  thirty 
persons.  After,  commanded  the  provost  that  she 
should  be  put  in  a great  pot  full  of  boiling  lead, 
and  when  she  entered  into  the  said  pot,  all  the 
lead  became  cold,  so  that  she  felt  no  harm.  And 
the  provost  cursed  his  gods  because  they  might  not 
punish  a maid  that  so  vanquished  them.  And  then 
he  commanded  to  smite  off  her  head.  And  when 
she  was  led  to  be  beheaded,  the  devil  appeared  to 
the  provost  in  figure  of  a young  man,  and  said : 

Spare  not  good  people,  and  of  her  have  no  mercy, 
for  she  hath  blamed  your  gods  and  done  much 
harm,  and  me  she  hath  beaten  this  night  past, 
therefore  render  to  her  that  she  hath  deserved. 

With  these  words  S.  Juliana  looked  behind  her 
for  to  wit  who  said  such  words  of  her.  Anon  the 
devil  said : Alas ! alas ! caitiff  that  I am,  I doubt 
me  that  yet  she  will  take  and  bind  me,  and  so 
he  vanished  away.  After  this,  that  she  had 
admonished  the  people  to  love  and  serve  Jesu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


5<> 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Christ  she  prayed  them  all  to  pray  for  her,  and 
Chairing  then  her  head  was  smitten  off.  The  provost 
Peter  the  entere^  ini0  a 8^P  thirty-four  men  for  to 

Apostle  P338  an  arm  the  8ea  > anon  came  a great  orage 
and  a tempest,  which  drowned  the  provost  and  all 
his  company  in  the  sea,  and  the  sea  threw  their 
bodies  to  the  rivage,  and  wild  beasts  came  thither 
and  ate  them.  Thus  this  holy  virgin  S.  Juliana 
suffered  martyrdom  for  our  Lord  the  fourteenth 
calends  of  the  month  of  March.  Let  us  pray  to 
her  that  she  pray  for  us,  etc. 

Of  the  Chairing  of  S.  Peter  the  Apostle . 

The  chair  is  said  in  three  manners,  that  is,  the 
chair  royal,  as  it  is  said  in  the  book  of  Kings  : 
David  sitting  in  a chair.  And  there  is  a chair  of 
priests,  as  Regum  primo,  Eli,  the  priest  sitting 
upon  a chair.  And  the  third  is  the  chair  for  a 
master  as  is  said,  Matt,  xxiii. : Upon  the  chair 
of  Moses,  etc.  Then  S.  Peter  sat  in  a chair 
royal,  for  he  was  prince  of  the  apostles,  and  he 
sat  in  the  chair  of  priests,  for  he  was  lord  of  all 
the  priests,  and  in  the  chair  of  the  master,  for  he 
was  a great  doctor  of  Christian  men.  The  first 
was  of  equity,  the  second  of  quantity,  and  the 
third  of  truth  and  of  virtue. 

Holy  church  halloweth  the  feast  of  S.  Peter 
the  apostle,  and  this  day  was  S.  Peter  honorably 
enhanced  in  the  city  of  Aqtioch,  and  set  in  the 
chair  as  a bishop.  Many  causes  there  be  where- 
fore this  feast  is  hallowed  and  established.  Of 
whom  the  first  is,  as  is  said  in  a sermon  of  this 
feast,  that  when  S.  Peter  went  for  to  preach  the 
word  of  God  and  founded  holy  church  by  his 
predication,  Niceta  and  Aquila  showed  unto  the 

Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


5i 


city  of  Antioch  that  Peter  the  apostle  of  God  The  # 
came  thither,  wherefore  the  people  and  also  the  Chairing 
nobles  of  the  city  came  against  him,  and  know-  ^ 
ledged  themselves  culpable  of  that  they  had  holden  Apostle 
of  the  predication  of  Simon  Magus,  which  was  an 
enchanter.  After,  they  did  to  be  brought  tofore 
him  all  such  people  as  were  vexed  with  divers 
maladies  and  sicknesses,  of  whom  there  were  so 
many  that  they  might  not  be  numbered.  S.  Peter 
beheld  their  repentance,  and  also  that  they  believed 
firmly  in  the  name  of  God,  and  anon  lift  up  his 
hands  unto  heaven,  and  made  his  prayer  to  God 
saying : O God,  F ather  Almighty,  I yield  to  thee 
thankings  in  this  that  thou  hast  worthily  fulfilled 
the  promises  of  thy  blessed  Son,  by  which  all 
creatures  may  know  that  thou  art  one  only  God  in 
heaven  and  in  earth.  And  after,  he  ascended  up 
into  an  high  place,  and  all  the  multitude  of  sick 
men  were  brought  tofore  him,  and.  he  said  to  them 
in  this  manner : Ye  that  see  me  a mortal  man  as 
ye  be,  ween  ne  suppose  not  ye  that  by  me  ye  may 
be  healed,  but  by  him  that  is  descended  from 
heaven  to  earth,  which  giveth  to  all  them  that 
believe  in  him  full  health  of  body  and  of  soul. 

This  ought  ye  to  believe  to  the  end  that  all  may 
know  that  ye  that  thus  believe  entirely  with  all 
your  heart  in  Jesu  Christ  may  be  made  whole  and 
guerished  by  him.  And  anon  all  they  that  were 
sick  cried  with  a high  voice : We  believe  that  Jesu 
Christ  is  very  God.  Suddenly  a light  appeared 
there,  and  all  the  sick  people  were  guerished  and 
healed  of  whatsomever  malady  they  had.  And  that 
same  day  the  Holy  Ghost  showed  so  greatly  his 
grace,  that  from  the  least  unto  the  most,  all  believed 
in  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.  And  there  were  baptized 
in  seven  days  more  than  ten  thousand  persons  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


52 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


'Hie  men,  women,  and  children,  and  also  Theophilus, 
t^ie  or<^  an<^  Provo8t  city*  whom  S.  Peter 
Peterthe  ^ad  raised  his  son  which  had  been  fourteen  years 
Apostle  dead.  And  some  say  that  of  his  palace  he  made 
a church  in  the  which  all  the  people  set  up  a chair 
for  S.  Peter  to  sit  in  more  higher,  for  to  preach 
the  doctrine  of  Jesu  Christ,  and  the  better  to  be 
heard  and  seen.  And  of  the  exalting  thus  of  S. 
Peter  into  this  chair,  this  feast  taketh  the  name  of 
the  chairing  of  S.  Peter.  And  in  this  church  was 
S.  Peter  seven  years,  and  from  thence  he  went 
to  Rome  and  governed  the  church  of  Rome 
twenty-five  years.  That  other  reason  why  this 
feast  was  established  was  for  the  reverence  of  the 
crown  or  tonsure  of  his  head,  which  yet  clerks 
bear  and  have,  for  like  as  some  say,  at  this  journey 
was  first  found  the  crown  of  the  clerks.  For 
when  S.  Peter  preached  at  the  first  time  in  the 
city  of  Antioch,  the  paynims  sheared  him  upon  his 
head  above,  like  a fool,  in  despising  Christian  law. 
And  because  this  was  done  to  S.  Peter  to  do  him 
despite  and  shame,  it  was  sith  stablished  that  the 
clergy  should  have  his  crown  shaven  in  sign  of 
right  great  honour  and  authority.  And  it  is  to  wit 
that  in  the  crown  be  three  things  : first  the  head  is 
discovered  and  bare  above  and  the  hair  cut  away, 
and  the  crown  is  round.  There  be  three  reasons 
why  the  head  is  bare,  of  which  S.  Denis  assigneth 
the  twain,  and  saith  the  rasure  and  cutting  off  of 
the  hair  signifieth  pure  life  and  clean  without 
any  arraying  withoutforth ; for  like  as  hairs  be 
naturally  for  to  adorn  the  head,  right  so  deform 
they  the  head  when  they  be  cut  off  by  mockery  or 
otherwise.  Also  good  manners  which  ought  to 
adorn  the  clean  life,  deform  the  holy  conversation 
when  they  be  left  and  taken  away  by  habits  covetous 

Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


S3 


and  proud.  Also  the  rasure  or  shaving  which  is  The 
on  the  overmo8t  part  of  the  head  signifieth  that  Chairing 
between  God  and  them  ought  to  be  nothing  ne  ^ 
mean  that  should  displease  God,  but  their  love  Apostle 
should  be  in  God  without  any  letting  and  empesh- 
ment  and  should  address  in  him  their  thoughts. 

The  second  thing  that  is  in  the  crown  is  that  the 
hairs  be  shaven  clean  away.  By  that  is  signified 
that  the  clerks  ought  to  take  away  from  their 
hearts  all  vain  thoughts  which  might  let  and 
empesh  the  service  divine,  and  also  ought  to  be 
withdrawn  from  all  temporal  business,  and  only  to 
have  their  necessities.  The  third  thing  that  is  in 
the  crown  is  that  it  is  round,  and  this  figure  seemeth 
good  by  many  reasons.  The  first  is  that  a round 
figure  hath  neither  beginning  nor  end.  The 
second  is,  in  a round  crown  be  no  corners,  and  as 
S.  Bernard  saith  whereas  be  corners  there  is 
gladly  filth*  and  that  is  to  be  understood  that  the 
clerks  ought  not  to  have  in  their  hearts  no  corners 
where  the  filth  of  sins  might  assemble,  but  ought  to 
have  a clean  conscience,  and  also  they  ought  to 
have  truth  in  their  mouths.  For  as  saith  S. 

Jerome:  Truth  seeketh  no  comers.  The  third 
reason  is,  for  like  as  the  figure  of  a crown  is 
most  fair  among  all  other,  so  the  conversation  of 
clerks  or  priests  ought  to  be  best  adorned  of  good 
manners  among  all  other  lay  people.  The  fourth 
reason  is,  for  like  as  a crown  hath  but  one  way 
round  and  no  figure,  like  as  S.  Austin  saith : There 
is  none  so  simple  a figure  as  that  which  hath  but  - 
one  way,  also  the  clerks  ought  to  be  simple  in 
their  conversation,  without  fiction  and  pride.  And 
it  is  to  wit  that  holy  church  halloweth  of  S.  Peter 
three  feasts  in  the  year  for  three  gifts  that  he  hath 
power  to  give  to  the  people.  The  first  is  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  chair,  for  he  giveth  absolution  of  sins.  The  second 
M ^ea8t  *8  advincula,  that  is  the  first  day  of 

a the  August,  for  he  by  his  power  transumeth  the  pain 
Apostle  perpetual  due  for  sins  mortal  into  pain  temporal. 
The  third  feast  is  of  his  martyrdom,  for  he  hath 
power  to  release  some  pains  of  penance  enjoined 
for  the  sins  confessed,  and  for  these  three  causes  he 
is  digne  and  worthy  honorably  to  be  served  and 
worshipped.  Let  us  then  pray  to  him  that  he  may 
impetre  and  get  to  us  remission  of  all  our  sins,  and 
after  this  short  transitory  life  we  may  come  to 
everlasting  joy  and  glory  in  heaven.  Amen. 


Of  S,  Matthias  the  Apostle , and first  the 
interpretation  of  his  name . 

Matthias  in  Hebrew  is  as  much  to  say  as  given 
to  our  Lord,  or  a gift  of  our  Lord,  or  else  humble 
or  little.  For  he  was  given  of  our  Lord  when  he 
was  chosen  from  the  world,  and  was  set  and 
entered  among  the  seventy-two  disciples,  he  was 
also  given  of  our  Lord  when  he  was  chosen  by  lot 
and  numbered  among  the  apostles.  He  was  little 
for  he  had  all  very  meekness  in  him  and  humility. 
There  be  three  manners  of  humilities,  as  S. 
Ambrose  saith  that:  The  first  is  of  the  affliction 
by  which  a man  is  made  humble ; the  second  is 
consideration  of  himself,  and  the  third  is  of  the 
devotion  which  is  of  the  knowledge  of  his  maker. 
S.  Matthias  had  the  first  in  suffering  martyrdom, 
the  second  was  in  despising  himself,  and  he  had 
the  third  in  amarvelling  the  majesty  of  our  Lord. 
For  Matthias  is  said  as  doing  good  for  evil,  for  he 
being  good  was  set  in  the  place  of  Judas  the 
traitor.  And  his  life  is  read  in  holy  church,  and 
Bede  writeth  it  as  many  holy  men  bear  witness. 


Digitized  by  vi  ■ OQ IC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


55 


Of  S.  Matthias . 

S.  Matthias  the  apostle  was  in  the  place  of 
Judas  the  traitor,  and  therefore  first  we  shall 
rehearse  here  the  birth  and  beginning  of  Judas. 
It  is  read  in  a history,  though  it  be  named 
apocrypha,  that  there  was  a man  in  Jerusalem 
named  Reuben,  and  by  another  named  Simeon,  of 
the  kindred  of  David,  or,  after  S.  Jerome,  of  the 
tribe  of  Issachar,  which  had  a wife  named  Ciborea, 
and  on  the  night  that  Judas  was  conceived  his 
mother  had  a marvellous  dream  whereof  she  was 
so  sore  afeard.  For  her  seemed  that  she  had  con- 
ceived a child  that  should  destroy  their  people, 
and  because  of  the  loss  of  all  their  people  her 
husband  blamed  her  much,  and  said  to  her : Thou 
sayest  a thing  over  evil,  or  the  devils  will  deceive 
thee.  She  said:  Certainly  if  so  be  that  I shall 
have  a son,  I trow  it  shall  be  so,  as  I h$ve  had  a 
revelation  and  none  illusion.  When  the  child  was 
born  the  father  and  mother  were  in  great  doubt, 
and  thought  what  was  best  to  do,  for  they  durst 
not  slay  the  child  for  the  horror  that  they  should 
have  therein,  neither  they  wist  not  how  they  might 
nourish  one  that  should  destroy  their  lineage. 
Then  they  put  him  to  a little  fiscelle  or  basket 
well  pitched,  and  set  it  in  the  sea,  and  abandoned 
him  to  drive  whither  it  would.  And  anon  the 
floods  and  waves  of  the  sea  brought  and  made  him 
arrive  in  an  island  named  Scarioth,  and  of  this 
name  was  he  called  Judas  Scariotes.  Now  it 
happed  that  the  queen  of  this  country  went  for  to 
play  on  the  rivage  of  the  sea,  and  beheld  this  little 
nacelle  and  the  child  therein,  which  was  fair,  and 
then  she  sighed  and  said:  O Lord  God,  how 
should  I be  eased  if  I had  such  a child,  then  at 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Matthias 
the 

Apostle 


56 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  the  least  should  not  my  realm  be  without  heir, 
Matfh t?«  Then  commanded  she  that  the  child  should  be 
^ taken  up,  and  be  nourished,  and  she  fained  herself 
Apostle  to  be  great  with  child  and  after  published  that  she 
had  borne  a fair  son.  When  her  husband  heard 
say  hereof  he  had  great  joy,  and  all  the  people  of 
the  country  made  great  feast.  The  king  and 
queen  did  do  nourish  and  keep  this  child  like  the 
son  of  a king.  Anon  after,  it  happed  that  the 
queen  conceived  a son,  and  when  it  was  born  and 
grown  Judas  beat  oft  that  child,  for  he  weened 
that  he  had  been  his  brother,  and  oft  he  was 
chastised  therefore,  but  alway  he  made  him  to 
weep  so  long  that  the  queen  which  knew  well  that 
Judas  was  not  her  son,  and  at  the  last  she  said  the 
truth,  and  told  how  that  Judas  was  found  in  the 
sea.  And  ere  this  yet  was  known  Judas  slew 
the  child  that  he  had  supposed  to  be  his  brother, 
and  was  son  to  the  king,  and  in  eschewing  the 
sentence  of  death  he  fled  anon  and  came  into 
Jerusalem,  and  entered  into  the  court  of  Pilate 
which  then  was  provost.  And  he  so  pleased  him 
that  he  was  great  with  him,  and  had  in  great 
cherety  and  nothing  was  done  without  him. 

Now  it  happed  on  a day  that  Pilate  went  for  to 
disport  him  by  a garden  belonging  to  the  father  of 
Judas,  and  was  so  desirous  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of 
the  apples  that  he  might  not  forbear  them.  And 
the  father  of  Judas  knew  not  Judas  his  son,  for  he 
supposed  that  he  had  been  drowned  in  the  sea  long 
tofore,  ne  the  son  knew  not  the  father.  When 
Pilate  had  told  to  Judas  of  his  desire,  he  sprang 
into  the  garden  of  his  father  and  gathered  of  the 
fruit  for  to  bear  to  his  master,  but  the  father  of 
Judas  defended  him,  and  there  began  between  them 
much  strife  and  debate,  first  by  words  and  after 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


57 


with  fighting,  so  much  that  Judas  smote  his  father  The  Life 
with  a stone  on  the  head  that  he  slew  him,  and.  - 
after  brought  the  apples  unto  Pilate,  and  told  to 
him  how  that  he  had  slain  him  that  owned  the  Apostle 
garden.  Then  sent  Pilate  to  seize  all  the  good 
that  the  father  of  Judas  had,  and  after  gave  his 
wife  to  Judas  in  marriage,  and  thus  Judas  wedded 
his  own  mother. 

Now  it  happed  on  a day  that  the  lady  wept  and 
sighed  much  strongly  and  said:  Alas!  how  un- 
happy that  I am!  I have  lost  my  son  and  my 
husband.  My  son  was  laid  on  the  sea,  and  I 
suppose  that  he  be  drowned,  and  my  husband  is 
dead  suddenly,  and  yet  it  is  more  grievous  to  me 
that  Pilate  hath  remarried  me  against  my  will. 

Then  demanded  Judas  of  this  child,  and  she  told 
him  how  he  was  set  in  the  sea,  and  Judas  told  to 
her  how  he  had  been  found  in  the  sea,  in  such 
wise  that  she  wist  that  she  was  his  mother,  and 
that  he  had  slain  his  father  and  wedded  his  mother. 
Wherefore  then  he  went  to  Jesu  Christ,  which  did 
so  many  miracles,  and  prayed  him  of  mercy  and 
forgiveness  of  his  sins.  Thus  for  it  is  read  in  the 
history  which  is  not  authentic. 

Our  Lord  made  Judas  one  of  his  apostles  and 
retained  him  in  his  company,  and  was  so  privy 
with  him  that  he  was  made  his  procurator,  and 
bare  the  purse  for  all  the  other,  and  stole  of  that 
which  was  given  to  Christ.  Then  it  happed  that 
he  was  sorry  and  angry  for  the  ointment  that  Mary 
Magdalene  poured  on  the  head  and  feet  of  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ  and  said  that  it  was  worth  three 
hundred  pence,  and  said  that  so  much  he  had  lost, 
and  therefore  sold  he  Jesu  Christ  for  thirty  pence 
of  that  money  usual,  of  which  every  penny  was 
worth  ten  pence,  and  so  he  recovered  three 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


58 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  hundred  pence.  Or  after  that  some  say  that  he 
of  S.  ought  to  have  of  all  the  gifts  that  was  given  to 
the  ^e8U  ^rist  tenth  penny,  and  so  he  recovered 
Apostle  th^y  pence  of  that  he  sold  him,  and  nevertheless 
at  the  last  he  brought  them  again  to  the  temple, 
and  after  hung  himself  in  despair,  and  his  body 
opened  and  cleft  asunder  and  his  bowels  fell  out. 
And  so  it  appertained  well  that  it  should  so  be, 
for  the  mouth  which  God  had  kissed  ought  not  to  be 
defouled  in  touching,  and  also  he  ought  not  to  die 
on  the  earth  because  all  earthly  creatures  ought  to 
hate  him,  but  in  the  air  where  devils  and  wicked 
spirits  be,  because  he  had  deserved  to  be  in  their 
company. 

Then  when  the  time  came  between  the  Ascension 
and  Whitsuntide,  S.  Peter  beheld  that  the  number 
of  the  apostles  was  minished,  he  arose  up  in  the 
middle  of  the  disciples  and  said  : Fair  brethren, 
ye  know  how  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  had  chosen 
twelve  men  for  to  bear  witness  of  his  resurrection, 
and  Judas  was  gone  the  evil  way,  it  behoveth  to 
accomplish  the  number  of  twelve  of  such  as  have 
been  with  him.  And  sith  they  chose  two  of  them 
that  were  there,  that  one  was  named  Joseph 
surnamed  Justus,  and  that  other  was  Matthias. 


And  then  they  made  their  orisons  and  said:  Lord 
God,  which  knoweth  the  hearts  of  all  the  persons, 
show  to  us  whom  we  shall  choose  of  these  twain 


here.  And  after,  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell 
on  Matthias,  which  forthwith  was  enumbered  with 
the  other  eleven,  and  then  were  they  twelve. 
But  the  holy  S.  Denis  saith  that  the  lot  was  a ray 
and  a shining  which  came  and  shone  upon  him. 
And  anon  he  began  to  preach,  and  had  his  pre- 
dication about  Jerusalem,  and  was  much  virtuous, 
and  did  many  miracles  as  is  written  of  him,  of 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


59 


whom  the  legend  followeth,  which  legend  is  found 
at  Treves  in  Almaine.  S.  Matthias  which  was 
set  in  the  place  of  Judas  was  born  in  Bethlehem 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  He  was  set  to  school  and 
in  a little  time  he  learned  all  the  science  of  the 
law  and  of  the  prophets ; he  was  afeard  of  fleshly 
lusts,  and  he  passed  his  youth  in  good  manners. 
His  courage  was  inclined  to  all  virtues,  for  he  was 
humble  and  debonair,  and  alway  ready  to  do 
mercy,  and  was  not  proud  in  prosperity,  ne  frail 
m adversity.  He  did  that  which  he  preached,  he 
made  the  blind  to  see  and  healed  the  sick  men,  he 
raised  the  dead  men,  and  did  great  miracles  in  the 
name  of  Jesu  Christ.  And  when  he  was  accused 
hereof  tofore  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  it  was 
demanded  him  that  he  should  answer  thereto  and 
he  said : It  behoveth  not  much  to  answer  hereto, 
because  for  to  be  a Christian  man  it  is  nothing 
criminal  but  it  is  a glorious  life.  Then  said  the 
bishop  that  he  would  spare  him  and  give  him 
respite  to  repent  him,  and  S.  Matthias  answered : 
God  forbid  that  I should  repent  of  the  truth  that 
I have  truly  found,  and  become  an  apostate.  He 
was  firm  in  the  love  of  God,  and  clean  of  his 
body,  and  wise  in  speaking  of  all  the  questions  of 
scripture,  and  when  he  preached  the  word  of  God 
many  believed  in  Jesu  Christ  by  his  predication. 
The  Jews  took  him  and  brought  him  to  justice 
and  had  gotten  two  false  witnesses  against  him  and 
for  to  accuse  him,  the  which  cast  on  him  first 
stones,  and  the  other  after,  and  so  was  stoned,  and 
he  prayed  that  the  stones  might  be  buried  that  the 
false  witnesses  had  cast  upon  him,  for  to  bear 
witness  against  them  that  stoned  him,  and  finally 
he  was  slain  with  an  axe  after  the  manner  of  the 
Romans.  And  he  held  up  his  hands  and  com- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Matthias 
the 

Apostle 


6o 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  mended  his  spirit  to  God.  And  after  it  is  said 
°f  S.  that  his  body  was  brought  to  Rome,  and  from 
tkc^Qp^  Rome  it  was  translated  to  Treves.  Another 
legend  saith  that  his  body  lieth  at  Rome,  and 
buried  under  a stone  of  porphyry  in  the  church  of 
S.  Mary  the  major. 


Of  S . Gregory  the  Pope . 

Gregory  is  said  of  grex,  which  is  to  say  a 
flock  5 and  of  gore,  which  is  to  say  a preacher. 
Then  Gregory  is  to  say  as  a preacher  to  an 
assembly  or  flock  of  people.  Or  it  is  said  as  a 
noble  doctor  or  preacher.  Or  Gregory  is  to  say 
in  our  language  as  awaked,  for  he  awoke  to 
himself,  to  God,  and  to  the  people,  he  awoke  to 
himself  by  keeping  of  cleanness,  to  God  by  good 
contemplation,  and  to  the  people  by  continual 
predication.  And  by  this  is  deserved  the  vision 
of  God;  and  S.  Austin  saith,  in  the  Book  of 
Order,  that  he  seeth  God  that  well  liveth,  well 
studieth,  and  well  prayeth.  And  Paul,  the 
historiographer  of  the  Lombards,  writeth  his 
history  and  life  of  him,  the  which  John  the 
deacon  afterwards  much  diligently  compiled  and 
ordained. 

S.  Gregory  was  bom  of  the  parentage  of 
senator 8 of  Rome,  whose  father  was  named 
Gordian  and  his  mother  Silvia.  And  when  he 
had  so  much  learned  that  he  was  a master  in 
philosophy,  and  also  was  rich  of  patrimony,  he 
thought  that  he  would  leave  all  the  riches  that  he 
had,  and  would  enter  into  religion  for  to  serve 
God.  But  in  this,  that  he  put  this  thought  in 
respite,  he  conceived  another  purpose,  that  was 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  61 

that  him  seemed  he  should  better  serve  God  in  a The  Life 
secular  habit,  in  doing  the  office  of  the  pretoria  o f of  S. 
the  provost  of  Rome,  for  to  give  to  each  man.  duly 
reason  after  the  right  of  his  cause*  But  he  found  p 
in  this  office  so  great  secular  business  that  it  began 
to  displease  him,  because  by  this  great  business  he 
withdrew  him  over  far  from  God.  In  this  mean- 
while his  father  and  mother  died,  in  such  wise 
that  he  was  rich  of  patrimony  and  puissant,  that  at 
the  beginning  he  founded  and  endowed  with  rents 
six  abbey 8 in  Sicily,  and  the  seventh  he  founded 
within  the  walls  of  Rome  in  the  honour  of  S. 

Andrew  the  apostle,  in  the  which  he  became  a 
monk,  and  the  remnant  of  his  patrimony  he  gave 
for  God’s  sake  so  that  he  that  tofore  went  clothed 
in  clothes  of  gold  and  of  silk,  and  adorned  with 
precious  stones  in  the  city,  when  he  was  monk 
served  in  a poor  habit  the  monks.  There  was  at 
the  beginning  of  his  conversation  of  so  perfect  a 
life  that  it  might  be  said  well  that  he  was  all 
perfect.  He  made  great  abstinences  in  eating,  in 
drinking,  in  waking,  and  in  praying,  in  so  much 
that  he  was  so  travailed  that  unnethe  he  might 
sustain  himself.  He  had  put  out  of  his  heart 
all  secular  things  so  that  his  conversation  was 
in  heaven,  for  he  had  addressed  all  his  desire  for 
to  come  to  the  joy  permanable. 

On  a time  it  happed  that,  S.  Gregory  in  his 
cell  of  the  same  abbey  whereas  he  was  abbot 
wrote  something,  and  an  angel  appeared  to  him  in 
semblance  of  a mariner,  which  seemed  as  he  had 
escaped  from  the  tempest  of  the  sea,  and  prayed 
him  weeping  to  have  pity  on  him.  Then  S. 

Gregory  commanded  that  there  should  be  given  to 
him  six  pence,  and  then  he  departed.  The  same 
day  the  angel  came  again  in  like  wise  as  he  did 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


62 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  tofore,  and  said  that  he  had  lost  all  his  good,  and 
of  S.  prayed  him  that  he  would  yet  help  him ; on  whom 
the^ooe  Gregory  had  Yet  P^7>  an<i  did  to  be  given  ta 
^ him  six  pence  more,  yet  at  the  third  time  he 
came  and  made  great  cry  and  wept,  and  prayed 
him  that  he  would  yet  help  him  toward  his  great 
loss,  so  that  S.  Gregory  commanded  his  provost 
that  he  should  yet  give  to  this  poor  man  an  alms. 
And  the  provost  said  that  there  was  no  more 
silver  in  all  the  abbey,  but  a dish  of  silver  in 
which  his  mother  was  wont  to  send  him  pottage. 
And  S.  Gregory  commanded  anon  that  that  dish 
of  silver  should  be  given  to  him  and  the  angel 
took  it  with  great  joy.  And  little  while  after,  this 
angel  appeared  to  S.  Gregory  and  said  to  him 
that  God  hath  sent  him  so  to  him. 


It  happed  afterward  that  as  S.  Gregory  passed 
through  the  market  of  Rome,  and  saw  there  two 
fair  children  white  and  ruddy  of  visage,  and  fair 
yellow  hair  which  were  for  to  sell.  And  S. 
Gregory  demanded  from  whence  they  were,  and 
the  merchant  answered,  of  England.  After  S. 
Gregory  demanded  if  they  were  Christian,  and  he 
answered:  Nay,  but  that  they  were  paynims.  Then 
sighed  S.  Gregory  and  said : Alas,  what  fair 
people  hath  the  devil  in  his  doctrine  and  in  his 
domination.  After  he  demanded  how  these  people 
were  called : he  answered  that  they  were  called 
Angles  men ; then  he  said  they  may  well  be  so 
called  for  they  have  the  visage  of  angels.  And 
for  that  S.  Gregory  went  to  the  pope,  and  by 
great  prayers  he  impetred  and  had  grant  that  he 
was  sent  in  to  England  for  to  convert  the  people 
of  that  same  country,  but  when  the  Romans  heard 
say  that  Gregory  was  sent  into  England,  anon 
they  went  to  the  pope  and  said  to  him : Thou 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


63 


hast  angered  S.  Peter,  thou  hast  destroyed  all  The  Life 
Rome,  and  hurt  all  holy  church  in  this  that  thou  S. 
hast  let  Gregory  go  out  of  Rome.  Of  which 
word  the  pope  was  angry  and  much  abashed,  and  ^ 
sent  anon  his  messengers  after  S.  Gregory,  and 
commanded  him  to  return  and  come  again  to 
Rome,  which  then  was  gone  on  his  journey  three 
days,  and  for  his  noble  and  good  renomee  the 
pope  made  him  cardinal  deacon.  After,  for  the 
corruption  of  the  air,  the  pope  Pelagius  died,  and 
then  S.  Gregory  was  elect  of  all  the  people  to 
be  pope,  but  he  refused  it  and  said  that  to  that 
dignity  he  was  not  worthy,  and  for  the  right  great 
mortality,  ere  that  he  was  sacred  pope  he  made  to 
the  people  a sermon  and  said : Right  dear  brethren, 
well  ought  we  to  have  doubt  of  the  scourge  of 
God  ere  that  we  feel  it,  and  yet  we  ought  to  fear 
it,  and  to  turn  and  forsake  our  sins,  lo ! ye  may 
behold  the  people  die  ere  they  beweep  their  sins  ; 
think  ye  then  in  what  point  he  cometh  in  the 
presence  of  the  judge  that  hath  had  no  time  to 
bewail  his  sins.  The  houses  be  void,  the 
children  die  in  the  presence  of  father  and  mother 
suddenly,  so  that  they  have  little  time  to  die, 
wherefore  every  man  amend  his  life  while  he  hath 
time  for  to  repent  him  of  his  evil  deeds  and  sins,  ere 
that  the  judge  call  him  from  the  mortal  body.  He 
saith  by  the  prophet,  I will  not  the  death  of  a 
sinner,  but  I will  that  he  return  and  live ; much 
soon  the  judge  heareth  the  sinner  when  he  con- 
verteth  from  his  sins  and  amendeth  his  life.  By 
such  manner  admonested  he  to  the  people  their 
health,  and  he  ordained  to  make  procession  in  all 
the  churches  much  solemnly  for  to  impetre  and  get 
mercy  for  this  mortality.  When  the  procession 
was  done  he  would  have  gone  privily  out  of  Rome, 

VOL.  III.  B 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


64 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  for  to  eschew  the  office  of  the  papalty,  but  against 
of  S.  that  the  gates  were  kept  so  that  he  might  not  issue. 

the?017  ^ t^ie  ^ast  ^ chanSe  ^abit,  anc*  80 
e °^C  much  did  with  the  merchants  that  they  brought 
him  out  of  Rome  in  a tun  upon  a cart.  And  when 
he  was  far  out  of  the  town,  he  issued  out  of  the 
tun  and  hid  him  in  a ditch,  and  when  he  had  been 


therein  three  days  the  people  of  Rome  sought  him 
all  about.  Anon  they  saw  a pillar  shining  descend 
from  heaven  straight  upon  the  ditch  in  which  S. 
Gregory  was ; and  a recluse,  a holy  man  saw  that 
by  that  pillar  angels  descended  from  heaven  to  S. 
Gregory  and  after  went  up  again.  Anon  then 
S.  Gregory  was  taken  of  the  people  and  after  the 
ordinance  of  holy  church  he  was  ordained  and 
sacred  pope  against  his  will,  for  he  was  much 
debonair,  humble  and  merciful  to  rich  and  poor, 
and  to  great  and  small.  Well  may  he  apperceive 
that  readeth  his  writings  how  oft  he  complained  of 
this  great  charge  that  he  was  charged  withal,  to 
which  he  said  he  was  not  worthy  thereto,  and  also 
he  might  not  hear  that  any  shoiild  praise  him,  ne 
in  letters  ne  in  words.  And  alway  he  was  in 
great  humility  and  accounted  himself  more  meek 
and  low  after  that  he  was  pope  than  tofore,  inso- 
much that  he  was  the  first  of  the  popes  that  wrote  : 
Servus  servorum  Dei,  that  is,  servant  of  the  servants 


of  God.  He  had  great  cure  and  was  busy  to  con- 
vert sinners ; he  made  and  compiled  many  fair 
books,  of  which  the  church  is  greatly  illumined. 
He  was  never  idle,  how  well  that  he  was  always 
sick.  He  converted  the  English  people  to  the 
Christian  faith  by  three  holy  men  and  good  clerks 
that  he  sent  thither,  that  is  to  wit  Augustin, 
Mellitus,  and  John,  for  to  preach  the  faith.  And 
because  the  mortality  ceased  not,  he  ordained  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN . LEGEND 


65 


procession,  in  the  which  he  did  do  bear  an  image  The  Life 
of  our  Lady,  which,  as  is  said,  S.  Luke  the  S. 
Evangelist  made,  which  was  a good  painter,  he  ^e^ope 
had  carved  it  and  painted  after  the  likeness  of 
the  glorious  Virgin  Mary.  And  anon  the 
mortality  ceased,  and  the  air  became  pure  and  clear, 
and  about  the  image  was  heard  a voice  of  angels 
that  sung  this  anthem  : Regina  caeli  laetare,  etc., 
and  S.  Gregory  put  thereto : Ora  pro  nobis,  deum 
rogamu8,  alleluia.  At  the  same  time  S.  Gregory 
saw  an  angel  upon  a castle  which  made  clean  a 
sword  all  bloody,  and  put  it  into  the  sheath,  and 
thereby  S.  Gregory  understood  that  the  pestilence 
of  this  mortality  was  passed,  and  after  that  it  was. 
called  the  Castle  Angel. 

S.  Gregory  did  every  day  so  great  alms  that 
many  in  the  country  about  were  nourished  by  him, 
whom  he  had  by  name  written,  and  also  the  monks 
that  dwelt  in  tie  Mount  Sinai  had  of  him  then- 
sustenance.  Among  all  other  alms  that  he  did  he 
governed  three  thousand  virgins,  to  whom  he  sent 
every  year  four  score  pound  of  gold,  and  also  he 
founded  to  them  an  abbey  in  Jerusalem,  and  sent 
to  them  that  therein  were  such  things  as  they 
lacked.  Every  day  had  he  poor  men  to  dinner. 

On  a time  it  happed  that  he  took  the  laver  for  to  give 
water  to  a pilgrim-for  to  wash  his  hands  by  great 
humility,  and  anon  the  pilgrim  vanished  away, 
whereof  S.  Gregory  had  marvel.  The  night  after 
our  Lord  appeared  in  a vision  and  said  to  him : 

The  other  days  thou,  hast  received  me  in  my 
members,  but  yesterday  thou  receivedst  me  in  my 
person. 

Another  day  S.  Gregory  commanded  to  his 
dispenser  that  he  should  bring  to  dinner  twelve 
poor  men,  and  when  S.  Gregory  and  tht  poor  men 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  were  set  at  meat,  he  told  at  the  table  sitting  thirteen 
of  S.  poor  pilgrims,  and  demanded  of  his  dispenser  why 
the?ope  ^one  ak°ve  ^is  commandment  to  bring  in 

**  more  than  twelve  persons.  And  anon  the  dis- 
penser, all  abashed,  went  and  told  the  poor  men, 
and  found  but  twelve,  and  said  to  S.  Gregory : 
Holy  father,  there  be  no  more  but  twelve,  and  so 
many  shall  ye  find  and  no  more.  Then  considered 
S.  Gregory  that,  one  of  the  pilgrims  that  sat  next 
to  him  oft  changed  his  visage,  for  oft  he  seemed 
young,  and  after  old.  And  after  dinner  S.  Gregory 
took  him  by  the  hand  and  brought  him  into  his 
chamber,  and  prayed  him  that  he  would  tell  him 
his  name.  And  he  answered : Wherefore  de- 
mandest  thou  my  name,  which  is  marvellous  ? 
Nevertheless  know  thou  well  that  I am  the  same 
poor  mariner  to  whom  thou  gavest  the  dish  of 
silver  in  which  thy  mother  was  wont  to  send  the 
pottage,  and  know  for  certain  that  sith  that  day 
that  thou  didst  to  me  that  alms,  God  hath  destined 
thee  to  be  pope.  And  said  moreover : I am  the 
angel  of  God,  and  he  hath  sent  me  hither  to  thee 
to  be  thy  defender  and  procurer  of  that  which 
thou  wouldst  demand  and  impetre  of  him,  and  after 
this  the  angel  vanished  away. 

And  in  that  time  there  was  an  herinit,  an  holy 
man,  which  had  left  and  forsaken  all  the  goods  of 
the  world  for  God's  sake,  and  had  retained  nothing 
bait  a cat,  with  which  he  played  oft,  and  held  it  in 
his  lap  deliciously.  On  a day  it  happed  that  he 
prayed  God  devoutly  that  he  would  vouchsafe  to 
show  to  him  to  what  saint  he  should  be  in  like  joy 
in  heaven,  because  for  his  love  he  had  left  all  the 
world  and  renounced.  Upon  this  God  showed 
him  in  a vision  that  S.  Gregory  and  he  should  have 
like  jay  in  heaven.  And  when  he  understood  this 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE.  GOLDEN  LEGEND  67 

he  sighed  sore  and  praised  little  his  poverty,  which 
he  had  long  suffered  and  borne,  if  he  should  have 
like  merit  which  abounded  so  greatly  in  secular 
riches.  Upon  this  there  came  a voice  to  him 
which  said  that : The  possession  of  riches  maketh 
not  a man  in  this  world  rich,  but  the  ardour  of 
covetise.  Then  be  still  thou,  darest  thou  compare 
thy  poverty  to  the  riches  of  S.  Gregory  which 
lovest  more  thy  cat,  with  whom  thou  ceasest  not 
to  stroke  and  play,  than  S.  Gregory  doth  all 
his  riches,  for  he  ceaseth  never,  to  give  alms  for 
God’s  sake  ? Then  the  hermit  thanked  Almighty 
God,  and  prayed  that  he  might  have  his  merit 
and  reward  with  S.  Gregory  in  the  glory  of 
paradise. 

On  a day  it  happed  that  S.  Gregory  sang  mass 
in  the  church  of  S.  Mary  major,  and  when  he  had 
said  : Pax  domini  sit  semper  - vobiscum,  anon  the 
angel  said : Et  cum  spiritu  tuo,  and  from  then 
forthon  the  pope  ordained  a station  in  that  church 
every  year  on  Easter  day,  and  when  then  he  said 
in  his  mass : Pax  domini,  etc.,  none  shall  answer, 
in  remembrance  of  this  miracle. 

In  the  time  that  Trajan  the  emperor  reigned, 
and  on  a time  as  he  went  toward  a battle  out  of 
Rome,  it  happed  that  in  his  way  as  he  should  ride, 
a woman,  a widow,  came  to  him  weeping  and  said : 
I pray  thee,  sire,  that  thou  avenge  the  death  of  one 
my  son  which  innocently  and  without  cause  hath 
bein  slain.  The  emperor  answered:  If  I come 
again  from  the  battle  whole  and  sound  then  I shall 
do  justice  for  the  death  of  thy  son.  Then  sai4 
the  widow : Sire,  and  if  thou  die  in  the  battle  who 
shall  then  avenge  his  death?  And  the  emperor 
said : He  that  shall  come  after  me.  And  the 
widow  said : Is  it  not  better  that  thou  do  to  me 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S, 
Gregory 
the  Pope 


63 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  justice  and  have  the  merit  thereof  of  God  than  an- 
of  S.  other  have  it  for  thee  ? Then  had  Trajan  pity  and 
the^ooe  descended  from  his  horse  and  did  justice  in  aveng- 
ing the  death  of  her  son.  On  a time  S.  Gregory 
went  by  the  market  of  Rome  which  is  called  the 
market  of  Trajan,  and  then  he  remembered  of 
the  justice  and  other  good  deeds  of  Trajan,  and 
how  he  had  been  piteous  and  debonair,  and  was 
much  sorrowful  that  he  had  been  a paynim,  and 
he  turned  to  the  church  of  S*  Peter  wailing  for 
the  horror  of  the  miscreance  of  Trajan.  Then 
answered  a voice  from  God  saying : I have  now 
heard  thy  prayer,  and  have  spared  Trajan  from 
the  pain  perpetual.  By  this,  as  some  say,  the 
pain  perpetual  due  to  Trajan  as  a miscreant  was 
somedeal  taken  away,  but  for  all  that  was  not  he 
quit  from  the  prison  of  hell,  for  the  soul  may  well 
be  in  hell  and  feel  there  no  pain  by  the  mercy  of 
God.  And  after,  it  is  said  that  the  angel  in  his 
answer  said  more  to  thus : Because  thou  hast 
prayed  for  a paynim,  God  granteth  thee  to  choose 
of  two  things,  that  one  which  thou  wilt,  or  thou 
shalt  be  two  days  in  purgatory  in  pain,  or  else  all 
the  days  of  thy  life  thou  shalt  languish  in  sickness. 
Then  answered  S.  Gregory  that  he  had  liefer  to 
have  sickness  all  his  life  in  this  world,  than  to  feel 
by  two  days  the  pains  of  purgatory.  And  ever 
after  he  had  continually  the  fevers,  or  axes,  or  the 
gout  in  his  feet,  and  hereof  himself  maketh  mention 
in  one  his  epistle,  and  saith : I am  so  much  tor- 
mented of  the  gout  in  my  feet,  and  of  other 
sicknesses  that,  my  life  is  to  me  a great  pain,  every 
day  meseemeth  that  I ought  to  die,  and  always  I 
abide  the  death.  Some  time  my  pain  is  little,  and 
some  time  right  great,  but  it  is  not  so  little  that  it 
departeth  from  me,  ne  so  great  that  it  bringeth  me 


Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


69 


to  death,  and  thus  it  is  that  I,  that  am  always  The  Lite 
ready  to  die,  am  withdrawn  from  death.  It  ofS. 
happed  that  a widow  that  was  wont  every  Sunday 
to  bring  hosts  to  sing  mass  with,  should  on  a time  ** 
be  houseled  and  communed,  and  when  S.  Gregory 
should  give  to  her  the  holy  sacrament  in  saying : 

Corpus  domini  nostri,  etc.,  that  is  to  say:  The 
body  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  keep  thee  into  ever- 
lasting life,  anon  this  woman  began  to  smile  tofore 
S.  Gregory,  and  anon  he  withdrew  his  hand,  and 
remised  the  sacrament  upon  the  altar.  And  he 
demanded  her,  tofore  the  people,  why  she  smiled, 
and  she  said : Because  that  the  bread  that  I have 
made  with  my  proper  hands  thou  namest  it  the 
body  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.  Anon  S.  Gregory 
put  himself  to  prayer  with  the  people,  for  to  pray 
to  God  that  hereupon  he  would  show  his  grace 
for  to  confirm  our  belief,  and  when  they  were 
risen  from  prayer,  S.  Gregory  saw  the  holy 
sacr ament  in  figure  of  a piece  of  flesh  as  great  as 
the  little  finger  of  an  hand,  and  anon  after,  by  the 
prayers  of  S.  Gregory,  the  flesh  of  the  sacrament 
turned  into  semblance  of  bread  as  it  had  been 
tofore,  and  therewith  he  communed  and  houseled 
the  woman,  which  after  was  more  religious,  and  the 
people  more  firm  in  the  faith. 

S.  Gregory  made  and  ordained  the  song  of  the 
office  of  holy  church,  and  established  at  Rome  two 
schools  of  song,  that  one  beside  the  church  of  S. 

Peter,  and  that  other  by  the  church  of  S.  John 
Lateran,  where  the  place  is  yet,  where  he  lay  and 
taught  die  scholars,  and  the  rod  with  which  he 
menaced  them,  and  the  antiphoner  on  which  he 
learned  them  is  yet  there.  He  put  to  the  canon 
of  the  mass  these  words : Diesque  nostros  in  tua 
pace  disponas,  atque  ab  aeterna  damnatione  nos 


Digitized  by  Google 


70 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  eripi,  et  in  electorum  tuorum  jubeas  grege  numerari. 

of  S.  At  the  last  when  S.  Gregory  had  been  pope 
Longinus  years,  six  months  and  ten  days,  he  being 

full  of  good  works,  departed  out  of  this  world  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  six  hundred  and  six  years, 
in  the  time  when  Phocas  was  emperor  of  Rome. 
Let  us  then  pray  to  S.  Gregory  that  he  get  us 
grace  that  we  may  amend  so  ourselves  here  in  this 
life  that  we  may  come  unto  everlasting  life  in 
heaven.  Amen. 


Here  beginneth  of  S.  Longinus  the  Life • 

Longinus,  which  was  a puissant  knight,  was  with 
other  knights,  by  the  commandment  of  Pilate,  on 
the  side  of  the  cross  of  our  Lord,  and  pierced  the 
side  of  our  Lord  with  a spear ; and  when  he  saw 
the  miracles,  how  the  sun  lost  his  light,  and  great 
earthquaving  of  the  earth  was,  when  our  Lord 
suffered  death  and  passion  in  the  tree  of  the  cross, 
then  believed  he  in  Jesu  Christ.  Some  say  that 
when  he  smote  our  Lord  with  the  spear  in  the 
side,  the  precious  blood  avaled  by  the  shaft  of  the 
spear  upon  his  hands,  and  of  adventure  with  his 
hands  he  touched  his  eyes,  and  anon  he  that  had 
been  tofore  blind  saw  anon  clearly,  wherefore  he 
refused  all  chivalry  and  abode  with  the  apostles,  of 
whom  he  was  taught  and  christened,  and  after,  he 
abandoned  him  to  lead  an  holy  life  in  doing  alms 
and  in  keeping  the  life  of  a monk  about  thirty-eight 
years  in  Caesarea  and  in  Cappadocia,  and  by  his 
words  and  his  example  many  men  converted  he  to 
the  faith  of  Christ.  And  when  this  came  to  the 
knowledge  of  Octavian  the  provost,  he  took  him 
and  would  have  constrained  him  to  do  sacrifice  to 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  71 

the  idol 8,  and  S.  Longipus  said : There  may  no  The  Life 
man  serve  two  lords  which  be  contrary  to  other ; S.  . 
thine  idols  be  lords  of  thy  malices,  corrupters  of 
all  good  works  and  enemies  to  chastity,  humility 
and  to  bounty,  and  friends  to  all  ordure  of  luxury, 
of  gluttony,  of  idleness,  of  pride  and  of  avarice, 
and  my  Lord  is  Lord  of  soberness  that  bringeth 
the  people  to  the  everlasting  life.  Then  said  the 
provost : It  is  nought  that  thou  sayest ; make 
sacrifice  to  the  idols  and  thy  God  shall  forgive 
thee  because  of  the  commandment  that  is  made  to 
thee.  Longinus  said : If  thou  wilt  become  Christian, 

God  shall  pardon  thee  thy  trespasses.  Then  the 
provost  was  angry,  and  made  the  teeth  of  S. 

Longinus  to  be  drawn  out  of  his  mouth,  and  did  do 
cut  his  mouth  open.  And  yet  for  all  that  Longinus 
lost  not  his  speech,  but  took  an  axe  that  he  there 
found,  and  hewed  and  brake  therewith  the  idols 
and  said  : Now  may  we  see  if  they  be  very  gods 
or  not.  And  anon  the  devils  issued  out  and 
entered  into  the  body  of  the  provost  and  his 
fellows,  and  they  brayed  like  beasts  and  fell  down 
to  the  feet  of  S.  Longinus  and  said : We  know 
well  that  thou  art  servant  unto  the  sovereign  God. 

And  S.  Longinus  demanded  of  the  devils  why 
they  dwelled  in  these  idols,  and  they  answered : 

We  have  found  place  in  these  idols  for  us,  for 
over  all  where  Jesu  Christ  is  not  named  ne  his 
sign  is  not  showed,  there  dwell  we  gladly;  and 
because  when  these  paynims  come  to  these  idols 
for  to  adore  and  make  sacrifice  in  the  name  of  us, 
then  we  cpme  and  dwell  in  these  idols,  wherefore 
we  pray  thee,  man  of  God,  that  thou  send  us  not  in 
the  abysm  of  hell.  And  S.  Longinus  said  to  the 
people  that  there  were:  What  say  ye:  will  ye 
have  these  devils  for  your  gods  and  worship  them 


Digitized  by 


Google 


72 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  or  have  ye  liefer  that  I hunt  them  out  of  this 
of  S.  world  in  the  name  of  Jesu  Christ  ? And  the 
Longinus  p^pfe  8ajj  wjth  a high  voice  : Much  great  is  the 
God  of  Christian  people,  holy  man,  we  pray  thee 
that  thou  suffer  not  the  devils  to  dwell  in  this  city. 
Then  commanded  S.  Longinus  to  the  devils  that 
they  should  issue  out  of  these  people,  in  such  wise 
that  the  people  had  great  joy  and  believed  in  our 
Lord. 

A little  time  after  the  evil  provost  made  S. 
Longinus  to  come  tofore  him,  and  said  to  him  that 
all  the  people  were  departed,  and  by  his  enchant- 
ment had  refused  the  idols ; if  the  king  knew  it  he 
should  destroy  us  and  the  city  also.  Aphrodisius 
answered : How  wilt  thou  yet  torment  this  good 
man,  which  hath  saved  us  and  hath  done  so  much 
good  to  the  city  ? And  the  provost  said : He 
hath  deceived  us  by  enchantry.  Aphrodisius  said : 
His  God  is  great  and  hath  none  evil  in  him. 
Then  did  the  provost  cut  out  the  tongue  of 
Aphrodisius,  wherefore  S.  Longinus  signed  unto 
God,  and  anon  the  provost  became  blind  and  lost 
all  his  members.  When  Aphrodisius  saw  that,  he 
said : Lord  God,  thou  art  just  and  thy  judgment 
is  veritable.  And  the  provost  said  to  Aphrodisius : 
Fair  brother,  pray  to  S.  Longinus  that  he  pray  for 
me,  for  I have  done  ill  to  him,  and  Aphrodisius 
said : Have  not  I well  told  it  to  thee,  do  no  more 
so  to  Longinus  : Seest  not  thou  me  speak  without 
tongue?  And  the  provost  said,  I have  not  only 
lost  mine  eyes,  but  also  my  heart  and  my  body  is 
in  great  pain.  And  S.  Longinus  said:  If  thou 
wilt  be  whole  and  guerished  put  me  appertly  to 
death,  and  I shall  pray  for  thee  to  our  Lord, 
after  that  I shall  be  dead,  that  he  heal  thee.  And 
anon  then  the  provost  did  do  smite  off  his  head, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


73 


and  after,  he  came  and  fell  on  the  body  of  S.  The 
Longinus  and  said  all  in  weeping,  Sire : I have 
sinned  ; I knowledge  and  confess  my  filth,  and 
anon  came  again  his  sight,  and  he  received  health 
of  his  body  and  buried  honorably  the  body  of  S. 
Longinus.  And  the  provost  believed  in  Jesu 
Christ  and  abode  in  the  company  of  Christian  men, 
and  thanked  God,  and  died  in  good  estate.  All 
this  happed  in  Cassarea  of  Cappadocia  to  the  honour 
of  our  Lord  God,  to  whom  be  given  laud  and 
glory  in  secula  seculorum. 


Here  beginneth  the  Life  of  8.  Maur . 

The  year  that  S.  Benet  died  he  sent  S.  Maur 
and  four  fellows  with  him  into  France  that  is  to 
wit  Fuscinian,  Simplician,  Antoninian  and  Con- 
stantine, at  the  prayer  of  Varicam  the  bishop  of 
Meaux,  for  to  found  an  abbey  which  the  said 
bishop  would  make  of  his  own  good,  and  gave  to 
S.  Maur  a book  in  which  he  had  written  the  rule, 
of  his  hand.  And  as  they  passed  the  mountains 
of  Mongus  Sourgus  one  of  their  servants  fell 
from  his  horse  upon  a great  stone,  and  his  left  foot 
was  all  tofrushed,  but  as  soon  as  S.  Maur  had 
blessed  it  and  made  his  orison  he  was  guerished 
and  all  whole.  After  this  he  came  into  the 
church  of  S.  Maurice,  and  there  was  at  the  entry 
a blind  man  begging,  that  had  sat  there  eleven 
years,  and  was  named  Lieven,  which,  for  the  long 
usage  that  he  had  been  there,  he  knew  all  the 
office  of  the  church  by  hearing  that  he  had  learned 
thereby  without  more.  He  conjured  S.  Maur 
by  the  virtue  of  the  martyrs  that  he  would  help 
him,  and  anon  he  was  guerished  and  had  again  his 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


74 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


# The  sight  by  his  prayer,  and  then  S.  Maur  commanded 
°*  him  that  he  should  serve  all  his  life  in  the  church 
* Mawr  as  he  had  done. 

On  a.  night  this  holy  man  and  his  fellows 
harboured  in  the  house  of  a widow  which  was 
named  Themere,  the  which  had  a son  that  was  so 
sick  that  each  man  said  that  he  was  dead,  and  this 
holy  man  healed  him,  and  when  he  was  whole  he 
said  to  S.  Maur  : Thou  art  he  that  by  thy  merits 
and  by  thy  tears  hast  delivered  me  from  the 
judgment  where  I was  in,  condemned  to  the  fire 
of  hell.  Thus  as  they  held  their  way  on  the 
Good  Friday  in  the  abbey  of  which  S.  Romain 
was  abbot,  and  S.  Maur  said  to  S.  Romain : S. 
Benet  shall  depart  out  of  this  world  to-morrow. 
On  the  morn  after  the  hour  of  tierce,  as  S.  Maur 
was  in  his  prayers,  he  saw  the  way  by  which  S. 
Benet  mounted  in  to  heaven,  and  he  was  adorned 
with  palls  and  great  foison  of  clearness,  and  this 
vision  saw  two  other  monks.  Also  when  S. 
Maur  and  his  fellow  came  to  Orleans,  they  heard 
say  that  the  bishop  Varicam  of  Meaux  was  dead, 
and  he  that  was  in  his  place  would  not  receive 
them.  Then  S.  Maur  and  his  fellow  went  into  a 
place  that  is  called  Restis,  and  there  founded  he 
first  a house  for  to  adore  God  there  in  the  honour 
of  S.  Martin,  and  commanded  that  he  should  be 
buried  therein. 

A clerk  that  was  there  named  Larigiso  fell 
down  off  an  high  stair  upon  an  heap  of  stones  and 
was  all  tofrusshed,  but  S.  Maur  healed  him 
anon.  And  after,  Flocus,  which  was  one  of  the 
greatest  friends  of  the  king,  had  him  in  so  great 
reverence,  that  he  durst  not  approach  but  if  he 
bade  him.  Three  workmen  that  wrought  in  that 
house  began  to  say  shrewdly  of  S.  Maur,  and  say 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


75 


that  he  coveted  overmuch  vain  glory,  but  anon  The 
they  became  so  mad  that  one  of  them  lost  forth-  Life  of 
with  his  life  and  the  other  two  to-tare  themselves  Maur 
with  their  teeth.  The  holy  man  anon  put  his 
hand  in  their  mouths  and  made  the  fiend  to  go  out 
beneath,  and  after  he  raised  the  third  to  life  which 
had  been  dead,  and  commanded  him,  if  he1  would 
live,  that  he  should  no  more  enter  into  that  house, 
and  this  commanded  he  for  to  eschew  the  favour 
of  the  world. 

Theodebert,  King  of  F ranee,  came  for  to  visit 
him,  and  prayed  to  S.  Maur  and  the  brethren  that 
they  would  pray  for  him,  and  he  gave  to  them  of 
that  house  the  fee  royal  of  that  boscage,  and  all  the 
rents  thereto  belonging,  and  the  towns.  On  the 
morn  S.  Maur  went  to  see  the  gift  that  the  king 
had  given,  and  there  he  healed  one  having  the 
palsy  which  had  been  seven  years  sick.  The 
second  year  that  this  house  was  founded  came 
many  noble  men  of  the  country,  which  demanded 
that  their  children  might  be  clothed  and  received 
into  the  religion.  And  there  came  so  many  that 
the  twenty-sixth  year  of  the  foundation  of  the 
abbey,  there  were  an  hundred  and  forty  brethren. 

And  S.  Maur  commanded  that  they  should 
abide  in  that  number  without  more  or  less,  and  not 
to  increase  ne  minish  that  number.  After  this 
Clothaire,  the  king,  came  in  to  this  abbey,  and 
gave  thereto  the  chief  of  Blason  and  the  town 
Longchamp  therewith.  And  after  this  time  S. 

Maur  would  no  more  issue  out  of  the  abbey,  but 
he  went  and  abode  in  a side  of  the  church  of  S. 

Martin  where  he  had  made  a house  for  him,  and 
had  with  him  two  monks  for  to  serve  him,  but  he 
ordained  tofore  that  Bercuses  should  be  abbot  after 
him.  When  he  had  been  in  that  house  two  years 


Digitized  by  Google 


76 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  and  an  half  the  devil  appeared  to  him  on  a time, 
which  was  in  his  orisons,  and  said  to  him  that 
ratncK  there  should  be  great  destruction  of  his  brethren, 
but  the  angel  of  our  Lord  came  after  him  which 
recomforted  him,  and  then  he  came  unto  the 
brethren  and  said  to  them  that  he  and  many  of 
them  therewithin  should  pass  out  of  this  world* 
And  it  happed  that  within  a month  after,  there 
died  one  hundred  and  sixteen  monks  of  that  abbey, 
and  of  all  the  number  there  abode  no  more  alive 
but  twenty-four.  And  then  died  Anthonin  and 
Constantine  that  were  come  with  him.  A little 
while  after  died  S.  Maur  of  the  pain  of  his  side, 
the  forty-first  year  after  he  was  come  thither, 
the  eighteenth  calends  of  February,  and  he  died 
tofore  the  altar  of  S.  Martin,  where  he  was  covered 
with  an  hair.  The  other  of  his  fellowship  returned 
to  Mount  Cassin,  and  thus  accomplished  this 
blessed  saint  his  life  in  the  time  of  Louis  the 
emperor  the  second.  And  the  body  ot  S.  Maur 
was  borne  from  the  abbey  in  Angers,  named  Glan- 
feuil,  for  fear  of  the  Normans,  unto  the  abbey  of 
S,  Peter  des  Fosses  where  his  body  is  now, 
which  abbey  founded  S.  Banolanis  disciple  to  S. 
Columbain.  His  feast  is  the  fifteenth  day  of 
January. 

Here  followed  the  Life  of  S,  Patrick , and  the  inter - 
pretation  of  his  name • 

Patrick  is  as  much  to  say  as  knowledge,  for  by 
the  will  of  God  he  knew  many  of  the  secrets  of 
heaven  and  of  the  joys  there,  and  also  he  saw  a 
part  of  the  pains  of  hell. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


77 


Of  S.  Patrick . 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Patrick 


S.  Patrick  was  born  in  Britain,  which  is  called 
England,  and  was  learned  at  Rome  and  there 
flourished  in  virtues;  and  after  departed  out  of 
the  parts  of  Italy,  where  he  had  long  dwelled, 
and  came  home  into  his  country  in  Wales  named 
Pendyac,  and  entered  into  a fair  and  joyous  country 
called  the  valley  Rosine.  To  whom  the  angel  of 
God  appeared  and  said : O Patrick,  this  see  ne 
bishopric  God  hath  not  provided  to  thee,  but 
unto  one  not  yet  born,  but  shall  thirty  years 
hereafter  be  born,  and  so  he  left  that  country  and 
sailed  over  into  Ireland.  And  as  Higden  saith  in 
Polycronicon  the  fourth  book,  the  twenty-fourth 
chapter,  that  S.  Patrick’s  father  was  named 
Caprum,  which  was  a priest  and  a deacon’s  son 
which  was  called  Fodum.  And  S.  Patrick’s 
mother  was  named  Conchessa,  Martin’s  sister  of 
France.  In  his  baptism  he  was  named  Sucate, 
and  S.  Germain  called  him  Magonius,  and  Celes- 
tinus  the  pope  named  him  Patrick.  That  is  as 
much  to  say  as  father  of  the  citizens. 

S.  Patrick  on  a day  as  he  preached  a sermon  of 
the  patience  and  sufferance  of  the  passion  of  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ  to  the  king  of  the  country,  he 
leaned  upon  his  crook  or  cross,  and  it  happed  by 
adventure  that  he  set  the  end  of  the  crook,  or  his 
staff,  upon  the  king’s  foot,  and  pierced  his  foot 
with  the  pike,  which  was  sharp  beneath.  The 
king  had  supposed  that  S.  Patrick  had  done  it 
wittingly,  for  to  move  him  the  sooner  to  patience 
and  to  the  faith  of  God,  but  when  S.  Patrick 
perceived  it  he  was  much  abashed,  and  by  his 
prayers  he  healed  the  king.  And  furthermore  he 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


78 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Patrick 


impetred  and  gat  grace  of  our  Lord  that  no 
venomous  beast  might  live  in  all  the  country,  and 
yet  unto  this  day  is  no  venomous  beast  in  all 
Ireland. 

After  it  happed  on  a time  that  a man  of  that 
country  stole  a sheep,  which  belonged  to  his 
neighbour,  whereupon  S.  Patrick  admonested  the 
people  that  whomsoever  had  taken  it  should  deliver 
it  again  within  seven  days.  When  all  the  people 
were  assembled  within  the  church,  and  the  man 
which  had  stolen  it  made  no  semblant  to  render 
ne  deliver  again  this  sheep,  then  S.  Patrick  com- 
manded, by  the  virtue  of  God,  that  the  sheep 
should  bleat  and  cry  in  the  belly  of  him  that  had 
eaten  it,  and  so  happed  it  that,  in  the  presence  of 
all  the  people,  the  sheep  cried  and  bleated  in  the 
belly  of  him  that  had  stolen  it.  And  the  man 
that  was  culpable  repented  him  of  his  trespass,  and 
the  others  from  then  forthon  kept  them  from 
stealing  of  sheep  from  any  other  man. 

Also  S.  Patrick  was  wont  for  to  worship  and 
do  reverence  unto  all  the  crosses  devoutly  that  he 
might  see,  but  cn  a time  tofore  the  sepulchre  of 
a paynim  stood  a fair  cross,  which  he  passed  and 
went  forth  by  aB  he  had  not  seen  it,  and  he  was 
demanded  of  his  fellows  why  he  saw  not  that 
cross.  And  then  he  prayed  to  God  he  said  for 
to  know  whose  it  was,  and  he  said  he  heard  a 
voice  under  the  earth  saying : Thou  sawest  it 
not  because  I am  a paynim  that  am  buried  here, 
and  am  unworthy  that  the  sign  of  the  cross  should 
stand  there,  wherefore  he  made  the  sign  of  the 
cross  to  be  taken  thence.  On  a time  as  S*  Patrick 
preached  in  Ireland  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ,  and 
did  but  little  profit  by  his  predication,  for  he  could 
not  convert  the  evil,  rude  and  wild  people,  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


79 


prayed  to  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  that  he  would  The  Life 
show  them  some  sign  openly,  fearful  and  ghastful,  of  S. 
by  which  they  might  be  converted  and  be  re- 
pentant  of  their  sins.  Then,  by  the  command- 
ment of  God,  S.  Patrick  made  in  the  earth  a 
great  circle  with  his  staff,  and  anon  the  earth  after 
the  quantity  of  the  circle  opened  and  there  ap- 
peared a great  pit  and  a deep,  and  S.  Patrick  by 
the  revelation  of  God  understood  that  there  was 
a place  of  purgatory,  in  to  which  whomsoever 
entered  therein  he  should  never  have  other  penance 
ne  feel  none  other  pain,  and  there  was  showed  to 
him  that  many  should  enter  which  should  never 
return  ne  come  again.  And  they  that  should 
return  should  abide  but  from  one  morn  to  another, 
and  no  more,  and  many  entered  that  came  not 
again.  As  touching  this  pit  or  hole  which  is 
named  S.  Patrick’s  purgatory,  some  hold  opinion 
that  the  second  Patrick,  which  was  an  abbot  and 
no  bishop,  that  God  showed  to  him  this  place  of 
purgatory ; but  certainly  such  a place  there  is  in 
Ireland  wherein  many  men  have  been,  and  yet 
daily  go  in  and  come  again,  and  some  have  had 
there  marvellous  visions  and  seen  grisly  and 
horrible  pains,  of  whom  there  be  books  made 
as  of  Tundale  and  others.  Then  this  holy  man 
S.  Patrick,  the  bishop,  lived  till  he  was  one 
hundred  and  twenty-two  years  old,  and  was  the 
first  that  was  bishop  in  Ireland,  and  died  in 
Aurelius  Ambrose’s  time  that  was  king  of  Britain. 

In  his  time  was  the  Abbot  Columba,  otherwise 
named  Colinkillus,  and  S.  Bride  whom  S.  Patrick 
professed  and  veiled,  and  she  over-lived  him  forty 
years.  All  these  three  holy  saints  were  buried 
in  Ulster,  in  the  city  of  Dunence,  as  it  were  in 
a cave  with  three  chambers.  Their  bodies  were 

F 

Digitized  by  Goode 


VOL.  III. 


8o 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  found  at  the  first  coining  of  King  John,  King 
Life  of  Harry  the  second’s  son,  into  Ireland.  Upon 
S.  Beset  wj108e  tombs  these  verses  following  were  written : 
Hie  jacent  in  Duno  qui  tumulo  tumulantur  in  uno, 
Brigida,  Patricius  atque  Columba  pius,  which  is 
for  to  say  in  English : In  Duno  these  three  be 
buried  all  in  one  sepulchre : Bride,  Patrick,  and 
Columba  the  mild. 

Men  say  that  this  holy  bishop,  S.  Patrick,  did 
three  great  things.  One  is  that  he  drove  with 
his  staff  all  the  venomous  beasts  out  of  Ireland. 
The  second,  that  he  had  grant  of  our  Lord  God 
that  none  Irish  man  shall  abide  the  coming  of 
Antichrist.  The  third  wonder  is  read  of  his 


purgatory,  which  is  more  referred  to  the  less 
S.  Patrick,  the  Abbot.  And  this  holy  abbot, 
because  he  found  the  people  of  that  land  rebel, 
he  went  out  of  Ireland  and  came  in  to  England 
in  the  Abbey  of  Glastonbury,  where  he  died  on 
a S.  Bartholomew’s  day.  He  flourished  about 
the  year  of  our  Lord  eight  hundred  and  fifty,  and 
the  holy  bishop  died  the  year  of  our  Lord  four 
hundred  and  ninety  in  the  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
second  year  of  his  age,  to  whom  pray  we  that  he 
pray  for  us. 


Of  S.  Benet  the  Abbot , and  first  the  interpretation 
of  his  name . 

Benet  is  said  because  he  blessed  much  people, 
or  else  because  he  had  many  benedictions  in  this 
life.  Or  forasmuch  as  he  deserved  for  to  have 
blessings  or  benedictions  perpetual.  And  the  holy 
doctor,  S.  Gregory,  wrote  his  life. 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Sz 


Of  S.  Benet  the  Abbot . 

S.  Benet  was  born  of  the  province  of  Nursia, 
and  was  sent  to  Rome  for  to  study,  but  in  his 
infancy  he  left  the  schools  and  went  into  a desert, 
and  his  nourice,  which  tenderly  loved  him,  went 
alway  with  him  till  they  came  to  a place  named 
iEside,  and  there  she  borrowed  a vessel  for  to 
purge  or  winnow  wheat ; but  the  vessel  fell  to  the 
earth  for  negligence,  and  was  broken  in  two  pieces. 
And  when  S.  Benet  saw  his  nurse  weep  he  had 
great  pity,  and  made  his  prayers  to  Almighty  God, 
and  after  made  it  also  whole  as  it  had  been  tofore, 
then  they  of  the  country  took  it  and  hung  it  on  the 
front  of  the  church  in  witness  of  one  so  fair  a 
miracle.  Then  left  S.  Benet  his  nurse  and  fled 
secretly,  and  came  into  a hermitage  where  he  was 
never  known  of  no  man  but  of  a monk  named 
Romain,  which  ministered  to  him  meat  for  to  eat. 
And  because  that  there  was  no  way  from  the 
monastery  of  Romain  unto  the  pit  where  S.  Benet 
was,  he  knit  the  loaf  in  a cord  and  so  let  it  down 
to  him,  and  because  he  should  hear  when  Romain 
should  let  down  the  bread  he  bound  a bell  on  the 
cord,  and  by  the  sound  thereof  he  received  his 
bread,  but  the  devil  having  envy  of  the  charity 
of  that  one,  and  of  the  refection  of  that  other, 
cast  a stone  and  brake  the  bell,  but  nevertheless 
Romain  left  not  to  minister  to  him. 

It  happed  that  there  was  a priest  on  an  Easter 
day  that  had  arrayed  his  dinner  for  himself,  and 
our  Lord  appeared  to  him  and  said : Thou  ordain- 
est  for  thyself  delicious  meats,  and  my  servant 
dieth  for  hunger  in  such  a pit,  and  named  him 
the  place.  Then  the  priest  arose  and  bare  his 
meat  with  him  and  sought  so  long  that  he  found 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Benet 


82 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  S.  Benet  in  great  pain.  When  he  had  found  him 
Life  of  he  said  to  him : Arise  and  take  thy  meat  and 
S.  Benet  refection  for  it  is  Easter  Day.  He  answered,  I 
know  well  that  it  is  the  feast  of  Paske,  because 
that  I see  thee.  The  priest  said  to  him:  Cer- 
tainly this  day  is  the  day  of  Easter,  and  S.  Benet 
wist  it  not  because  he  had  dwelled  there  so  long 
and  so  far  from  people.  Then  said  they  graces, 
and  made  the  benediction,  and  took  their  refection. 
It  happed  after  this  that  a black  bird,  that  is 
called  a merle,  came  on  a time  to  S.  Benet  and 
pecked  with  his  bill  at  his  visage,  and  grieved 
and  noyed  him  so  much  that  he  could  have  no 
rest  for  it,  and  could  not  put  it  from  him,  but  as 
soon  as  he  had  made  the  sign  of  the  cross,  anon 
the  bird  vanished  away.  And  after  that  came  to 
him  a great  temptation  of  the  flesh,  by  the  which 
the  devil  tempted  him  in  showing  him  a woman, 
and  he  burnt  sore,  and  was  inflamed  in  his  courage, 
but  anon  he  came  again  to  himself ; and  after,  he 
despoiled  himself  all  naked  and  went  among  thorns 
and  wallowed  among  the  nettles,  so  that  his  body 
was  torn  and  pained,  by  which  he  healed  the 
wounds  of  his  heart.  Then  after  that  time  he 
felt  no  more  temptation  of  his  flesh. 

It  happed  that  the  abbot  of  a monastery  was 
dead,  and  for  the  good  renomee  of  this  holy  man 
S.  Benet,  all  the  monks  of  the  abbey  gave  their 
voices  and  elected  S.  Benet  for  their  abbot,  but 
he  accorded  not  thereto,  ne  agreed  to  them,  for 
he  said  that  his  conditions  and  manners  were  not 
according  to  theirs.  Notwithstanding  he  was 
vanquished,  and  so  instantly  required,  that  at  the 
last  he  consented.  But  when  he  saw  they  lived 
not  ne  were  not  ruled  according  to  their  religion 
and  rule,  he  reproved  and  corrected  them  vigor- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


83 


ously.  And  when  they  saw  that  they  might  not  The 
do  their  wills  under  him,  they  gave  him  venom 
meddled  with  wine  for  to  drink,  but  S.  Benet 
made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  it  and  blessed 
it,  and  anon  the  vessel  brake  in  pieces,  which 
was  of  glass.  When  S.  Benet  then  knew  so  that 
in  that  vessel  was  mortal  drink,  which  might  not 
abide  ne  suffer  the  sign  of  the  cross,  he  rose  up 
and  said  2 God  have  mercy  on  you  fair  brethren  5 
I said  to  you  well,  at  the  beginning,  that  my 
conditions  and  manners  appertain  not  to  yours, 
from  henceforth  get  to  you  another  father,  for  I 
may  no  longer  dwell  here.  Then  went  he  again 
to  desert,  where  God  showed  for  him  many  signs 
and  miracles,  and  founded  there  two  abbeys. 

Now  it  happed  that  in  one  of  these  two  abbeys, 
was  a monk  that  might  not  endure  long  in  prayers, 
and  when  the  other  of  his  fellows  were  in  prayer 
he  would  go  out  of  the  church.  Then  the  abbot 
of  that  abbey  showed  this  to  S.  Benet,  and  anon 
he  went  for  to  see  if  it  were  true.  And  when 
he  came  he  saw  that  the  devil,  in  likeness  of  a V* 
little  black  child,  drew  him  out  of  the  church  by 
his  cowl.  Then  said  S.  Benet  to  the  abbot  and 
to  S.  Maur  : See  ye  not  him  that  draweth  him 
out?  They  said:  Nay.  Then  said  he:  Let 
us  pray  to  God  that  we  may  see  him.  When 
they  had  made  their  prayers  S.  Maur  saw  him, 
but  the  abbot  might  not  see  him.  The  next  day 
S.  Benet  took  a rod  and  beat  the  monk,  and  then 
he  abode  in  prayer,  like  as  the  devil  had  been 
beaten,  and  durst  no  more  come  and  draw  him 
away,  and  from  then  forthon  he  abode  in  prayer 
and  continued  therein. 

Of  the  twelve  abbeys  that  S.  Benet  had 
founded,  three  of  them  stood  on  high  rocks,  so 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


84 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  that  they  might  have  no  water  but  by  great  labour. 

Life  of  Then  came  the  monks  to  him  and  prayed  him 
tsenet  ^e  WOuld  set  these  abbeys  in  some  other 
place,  because  they  had  great  default  of  water. 
Then  went  S.  Benet  about  the  mountain,  and 
made  his  orisons  and  prayers  much  devoutly ; and 
when  he  had  long  prayed  he  saw  three  stones 
in  a place  for  a sign,  and  on  the  morn,  when  the 
monks  came  for  to  pray,  he  said  to  them  : Go 
ye  to  such  a place  where  ye  shall  find  three 
stones,  and  there  dig  a little  and  ye  shall  find 
water,  our  Lord  can  well  provide  for  you  water. 
And  they  went  and  found  the  mountain  all 
sweating  where  as  the  three  stones  were,  and 
there  they  digged  and  anon  they  found  water, 
so  great  abundance  that  it  sufficed  to  them,  and 
ran  down  from  the  top  of  the  hill  unto  beneath 
into  the  valley. 

It  happed  on  a time  that  a man  hewed  bushes 
and  thorns  about  the  monastery,  and  his  axe  or 
instrument  of  iron  that  he  hewed  with,  sprang 
out  of  the  helve  and  fell  into  a deep  water  ; then 
the  man  cried  and  sorrowed  for  his  tool,  and 
S.  Benet  saw  that  he  was  over  anguished  therefor 
and  took  the  helve  and  threw  it  after  into  the  pit, 
and  anon  the  iron  came  up  and  began  to  swim  till 
that  it  entered  in  to  the  helve. 

In  the  abbey  of  S.  Benet  was  a child  named 
Placidus,  which  went  to  the  river  for  to  draw 
water,  and  his  foot  slode  so  that  he  fell  into  the 
river  which  was  much  deep,  and  anon  the  river 
bare  him  forth  more  than  a bow-shot.  And  when 
S.  Benet,  which  was  in  his  study,  knew  it,  he 
called  to  S.  Maur,  and  said  that  there  was  a child 
which  was  a monk  that  was  about  to  be  drowned, 
and  bade  him  go  to  help  him.  And  anon  S. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


85 


Maur  ran  upon  the  water  like  as  it  had  been  on  The 
dry  ground  and  his  feet  dry  and  took  up  the  child 
by  the  hair,  and  drew  him  to  land,  and  after,  when  Bene* 
he  came  to  S.  Benet,  he  said  that  it  was  not  by 
his  merit  but  by  virtue  of  his  obedience. 

There  was  a priest  named  Florentin  which 
had  envy  on  S.  Benet,  and  he  sent  to  him  a loaf 
of  bread  envenomed.  After,  when  S.  Benet 
had  this  loaf  he  knew,  by  the  inspiration,  that  it 
was  envenomed.  He  gave  it  to  a raven  that  was 
wont  to  take  his  feeding  of  S.  Benet’ s hand,  and 
commanded  him  to  bear  it  unto  such  a place  that 
no  man  should  find  it.  Then  the  raven  made 
semblant  for  to  obey  to  the  commandment  of 
S.  Benet,  but  he  durst  not  touch  it  for  the  venom, 
and  fled  about  it  howling  and  crying.  S.  Benet 
said  to  him : Take  this  bread  hardily  and  bear  it 
away.  At  the  last  the  raven  bare  it  away  into  such 
a place  that  there  was  never  heard  tidings  thereof 
after,  and  came  again  the  third  day  after  and  took 
his  refection  of  S.  Benet’ s hand  as  he  was  wont  to 
do  tofore.  When  this  priest  Florentin  saw  that 
he  could  not  slay  S.  Benet,  he  enforced  him  to 
slay  spiritually  the  souls  of  his  disciples.  He 
took  seven  maidens,  all  naked,  and  sent  them  into 
the  garden  to  dance  and  carol  for  to  move  the 
monks  to  temptation.  When  S.  Benet  saw  the 
malice  of  Florentin  he  had  fear  of  his  disciples, 
and  sent  them  out  of  that  place.  When  Florentin 
saw  that  S.  Benet  and  his  monks  went  out,  he  de- 
mened  great  joy  and  made  great  feast,  and  anon 
the  solar  fell  upon  him  and  slew  him  suddenly. 

When  S.  Maur  saw  that  Florentin  was  dead, 
he  ran  after  S.  Benet  and  called  him,  6aying : 

Come  again,  for  Florentin  that  hath  done  so  much 
harm  to  you  is  dead.  When  S.  Benet  heard  this 


y Google 


86 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  he  was  sorry  for  the  perilous  death  of  Florentin, 
Life  of  and  because  S.  Maur  was  glad  for  the  death  of 
S.  Benet  |1£8  enemy,  as  him  seemed,  he  enjoined  him  penance 
therefor.  After  this  he  went  to  Mount  Cassin, 
where  he  had  another  great  adversary,  for  in  the 
place  where  that  Apollo  was  adored,  he  made 
an  oratory  of  S.  John  Baptist,  and  converted  all 
the  country  about  to  the  Christian  faith,  whereof 
the  devil  was  so  tormented  that  he  appeared  to 
S.  Benet  all  black,  and  ran  upon  him  with  open 
mouth  and  throat,  and  had  his  eyes  all  enflamed 
and  said  to  him,  Benet ! Benet ! and  S.  Benet 
answered  not.  The  devil  said : Cursed  and  not 
blessed,  why  have  I so  much  persecution  ? 

It  happed  on  a time  that  as  the  monks  should 
lift  a stone  for  a work  of  an  edifice,  they  might 
not  move  it,  then  there  assembled  a great  multitude 
of  people,  and  yet  they  all  might  not  lift  it,  but 
anon  as  S.  Benet  had  blessed  it,  they  lifted  it  anon. 
Then  apperceived  they  that  the  devil  was  upon  it 
and  caused  it  to  be  so  heavy.  And  when  they 
had  a little  made  the  wall  high,  the  devil  appeared 
to  S.  Benet  and  bade  him  go  see  them  that  edified, 
then  S.  Benet  sent  to  his  monks  and  commanded 
that  they  should  keep  them  well,  for  the  devil 
went  to  destroy  them.  But  ere  the  messenger 
came  to  them  the  deyil  had  thrown  down  a part 
of  the  wall,  and  had  therewith  slain  a young  monk. 
Then  they  brought  the  monk,  all  tobruised,  in  a 
sack  to  S.  Benet,  and  anon  S.  Benet  made  upon 
him  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  blessed  him,  and 
raised  him  to  life  and  sent  him  to  the  work  again. 

A lay  man,  of  honest  life,  had  a custom  once  in 
the  year  to  come  to  S.  Benet  all  fasting,  and  on 
a time  as  he  came,  there  was  one  that  bare  meat 
accompanied  with  him,  and  desired  that  he  would 


x 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


87 


eat  with  him,  but  he  refused  it.  After,  he  prayed  The 

him  the  second  time,  and  yet  he  refused  it,  and 

said  he  would  eat  no  meat  till  he  came  to  S.  Benet.  Bene* 

At  the  third  time  he  found  a fair  fountain  and  a 

much  delitable  place,  and  began  sore  to  desire  him 

to  eat  with  him,  and  at  the  last  he  consented  and 

ate.  And  when  he  came  to  S.  Benet  he  said  to 

him : Where  hast  thou  eaten  ? which  answered,  I 

have  eaten  a little.  O fair  brother,  the  devil  hath 

deceived  thee,  but  he  could  not  deceive  thee  the 

first  ne  the  second  time,  but  the  third  time  he  hath 

surmounted  thee.  Then  the  good  man  knelt 

down  to  the  feet  of  S.  Benet  and  confessed  him 

of  his  trespass. 

Attila,  the  king  of  Goths,  would  once  prove  if 
S.  Benet  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  sent  to 
him  his  servant,  and  did  do  array  him  with  precious 
robes,  and  delivered  to  him  a great  company  as  he 
had  been  the  king  himself.  When  S.  Benet  saw 
him  come,  he  said  to  him:  Fair  son,  do  off  that 
thou  wearest,  it  is  not  thine,  and  the  man  fell  down 
anon  to  the  ground  because  he  mocked  the  holy 
man,  and  died  anon. 

A clerk  that  was  vexed  with  the  devil  was 
brought  to  S.  Benet  for  to  be  healed,  and  S.  Benet 
put  him  out,  and  after,  said  to  the  clerk : Go,  and 
from  henceforth  eat  no  more  flesh,  and  go  no  more 
to  none  order,  for  what  .day  thou  goest  and  takest 
orders,  the  devil  shall  re-enter  into  thee.  This 
clerk  held  him  long  time  without  taking  any,  till 
at  last  he  saw  younger  than  he  that  went  to  take 
orders,  and  had  forgotten  the  words  of  S.  Benet, 
and  took  orders,  and  anon  the  devil  entered  in  to 
his  body  and  tormented  him  till  he  died. 

There  was  a man  that  sent  to  S.  Benet  two 
flagons  of  wine,  but  he  that  bare  them  hid  that 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


88 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  one,  and  presented  that  other  without  more. 

Life  of  When  S.  Benet  had  received  the  present  he 
S.  Benet  thanked  him  much  and  said  to  him : Fair  brother, 
take  good  heed  how  thou  shalt  do  with  that  which 
thou  hast  hid,  and  drink  not  thereof  for  thou 
knowest  not  what  is  therein.  Then  he  was 
ashamed,  and  so  confused  went  from  him,  and 
when  he  came  to  the  place  where  he  had  hid  it, 
he  would  wit  what  was  therein  like  as  S.  Benet 
had  told  to  him,  and  bowed  it  a little,  and  anon  a 
serpent  issued  out. 

It  happed  on  a time  that  S.  Benet  ate,  and  a 
young  man  which  was  son  to  a great  lord  held  to 
him  a candle,  and  began  to  think  in  his  heart  who 
is  this  that  I serve  ? I am  son  unto  a great  man  ; 
it  appertained  not  that  one  so  gentle  a man  as  I am 
be  servant  to  him.  When  S.  Benet  saw  by  ex- 
perience the  pride  that  arose  in  this  monk,  he 
called  another  monk  and  made  him  to  hold  the 
candle,  and  after  said  to  him : What  is  that  thou 
hast  ? bless  thy  heart  brother,  bless  it,  God  forgive 
it  thee,  now  thou  shalt  serve  me  no  more ; go  into 
thy  cloister  and  rest  thee  there. 

There  was  a man  of  the  king  of  Goths  which 
was  named  Gallas,  which  tormented  over  cruelly 
the  Christian  men,  because  he  was  of  the  sect  of 
the  Arians,  in  such  wise  that  where  he  found 
clerks  or  monks  he  slew  them.  Then  it  happed 
on  a day  that  he  tormented  a villain  or  a carle  for 
the  covetise  of  his  good ; when  the  carle  saw  that 
he  would  take  all,  he  gave  all  that  ever  he  had  to 
S.  Benet.  Then  left  Gallas  to  torment  him  a 
little,  but  he  bound  him  with  the  reins  of  his 
bridle,  and  drove  him  tofore,  and  he  rode  after  till 
that  he  came  to  the  abbey  of  S.  Benet,  and  bade 
him  that  he  should  show  to  him  this  Benet. 


Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


89 


When  he  came  thither  he  saw  S.  Benet  stand  The 
tofore  the  gate  alone  and  studied  in  a book  ; then 
said  the  villain  to  the  tyrant : Lo ! there  is  Benet  ^ 
that  thou  demandest  after.  When  Gallas  had 
looked  on  him  cruelly,  like  he  had  been  accustomed, 
he  had  supposed  to  have  dealt  with  him  like  as  he 
had  done  with  other  Christian  men,  and  said  to 
S.  Benet : Arise  up  anon  and  deliver  to  me  the 
goods  of  this  carle  which  thou  hast  by  thee. 
When  S.  Benet  heard,  he  lift  up  a little  his  eyes 
and  beheld  the  carle  that  was  tofore  him,  and  anon 
by  great  marvel  his  arms  were  unbounden,  he 
stood  tofore  the  tyrant  appertly,  without  dread. 

And  anon  Gallas  fell  down  to  the  feet  of  S.  Benet 
and  recommended  him  to  his  prayers.  And  never 
for  all  this  left  S.  Benet  to  read  on  his  book,  but 
called  his  monks  and  commanded  that  his  meat 
should  be  brought  to  him,  and  the  monks  did  so, 
and  sith  bare  it  away.  Then  admonested  S.  Benet 
the  tyrant,  and  said  to  him  that  he  should  leave 
his  cruelty  and  his  woodness,  and  he  departed  and 
never  after  that  day  he  demanded  of  villain  any 
good,  ne  of  the  man  that  S.  Benet  had  unbounden 
only  by  his  sight. 

It  happed  over  all  Champagne,  whereas  he 
dwelt,  that  so  great  a famine  was  in  the  country 
that  much  people  died  for  hunger.  Then  all  the 
bread  of  the  abbey  failed,  and  there  was  within 
but  five  loaves  for  all  the  convent ; when  S.  Benet 
saw  that  they  were  abashed  he  began  debonairly 
to  chastise  and  warn  them  that  they  should  have 
their  hearts  on  high  to  God,  and  said  to  them : 
Wherefore  are  ye  in  so  great  misease  for  bread  l 
If  ye  have  none  this  day  ye  shall  have  it  tomorn. 
Now  it  happed  that  on  the  morn  they  found  at 
their  gate  two  hundred  muddes  of  meal,  which 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


90 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  were  properly  sent  from  God,  for  never  man  wist 
Life  of  from  whence  they  came.  When  the  monks  saw 
Btaet  t^at  t^ey  thanked  God,  and  learned  that  they 
ought  not  doubt  ne  of  abundance  ne  of  poverty. 

It  happed  on  a time  that  S.  Benet  sent  his 
monks  for  to  edify  an  abbey,  and  said  that  at  a 
certain  day  he  would  come  see  them  and  show 
them  what  they  should  do.  Then  the  night  to- 
fore  that  he  had  said  to  come  he  appeared  to  the 
master  and  to  his  monks,  and  showed  to  them  all 
the  places  that  they  should  build,  but  they  believed 
not  this  vision  and  supposed  it  had  been  but  a 
dream.  Then  when  they  saw  that  he  came  not, 
they  returned  and  said  to  him : Fair  father,  we 
have  abided  that  thou  should st  have  come  to  us 
like  as  thou  promisedst  us.  Then  answered  he : 
What  is  that  ye  say  ? Remember  ye  not  that  I 
appeared  to  you  that  night  that  I promised  you 
and  enseigned  and  told  how  ye  should  do?  Go 
your  way  and  do  in  such  wise  as  I have  devised  , 
to  you  in  the  vision. 

There  were  two  nuns  nigh  unto  his  monastery 
which  were  of  much  noble  lineage,  which  were 
much  talkative,  and  restrained  not  well  their  tongues, 
but  tormented  overmuch  him  that  governed  them. 
And  when  he  had  showed  this  to  S.  Benet,  he 
sent  them  word  that  they  should  better  keep 
silence  and  rule  their  tongues,  or  he  would  curse 
them.  But  they  for  all  that  would  not  leave  it, 
and  so  anon  after,  they  died  and  were  buried  in 
the  church.  And  when  the  deacon  cried  in  the 
end  of  the  mass  that  they  that  were  accursed 
should  go  out  of  the  church,  the  nurse  that  had 
nourished  them  and  that  every  day  had  offered 
for  them,  beheld  and  saw  that,  when  the  deacon 
sang  so,  they  issued  out  of  their  sepulchres  and 

Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


9i 


went  out  of  the  church,  and  when  S.  Benet  knew  The 
hereof  he  offered  for  them  himself  and  assoiled  ^ifeof 
them.  Then  after  that  when  the  deacon  said  so  Befle 
as  afore,  they  never  issued  out  after  as  their  nurse 
had  seen  them. 

There  was  a monk  gone  out  for  to  see  his  father 
and  mother,  without  licence  and  blessing  of  his 
abbot,  and  the  day  after  he  came  thither  he  died  5 
and  when  he  was  buried  in  the  earth  the  earth  cast 
him  out  again,  and  so  it  did  twice.  Then  came 
the  father  and  mother  to  S.  Benet  and  told  him 
how  the  earth  threw  him  and  would  not  receive 
him,  and  prayed  that  he  would  bless  him.  Then 
took  he  the  blessed  sacrament  and  made  it  to  be 
laid  on  the  breast  of  the  corpse,  and  when  they 
had  done  so  they  buried  him,  and  the  earth  threw 
him  no  more  out,  but  received  the  body  and  held  it. 

There  was  a monk  that  could  not  abide  in  the 
monastery,  and  prayed  so  much  to  S.  Benet  that 
he  let  him  go,  and  was  all  angry,  and  anon  as  he 
was  out  of  the  abbey  he  found  a dragon  with  open 
mouth ; and  when  he  saw  him  he  had  fear  that 
he  would  have  denounced  him,  and  cried  loud : 

Come  hither  and  help  me ! come  hither,  for  this 
dragon  will  devour  me  I Then  the  monks  ran,  but 
they  saw  no  dragon,  and  brought  again  the  monk 
trembling  and  sighing.  Then  the  monk  promised 
that  he  never  would  depart  from  the  abbey. 

In  a time  there  was  in  that  country  a great 
famine,  and  all  that  ever  S.  Benet  might  get  and 
have,  he  gave  it  to  the  poor  people,  in  so  much 
that  he  had  no  more  in  the  abbey  but  a little  oil, 
and  he  commanded  yet  to  the  cellarer  to  give  it 
to  a poor  man.  The  cellarer  understood  him  well, 
but  he  gave  it  not  because  there  was  no  more  in 
the  convent.  And  when  S.  Benet  knew  it  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


92 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  took  the  vessel  and  cast  it  out  of  the  window,  and 
°f lt  was  glass,  and  it  fell  on  a stone  and  brake 
o.  Benet  HOt . then  he  reproved  the  cellarer  of  inobedience 
ana  01  me  little  hope  that  he  had  in  God ; and 
after  he  went  unto  his  prayers,  and  anon  a great 
empty  tun  that  was  there  was  full  of  oil,  insomuch 
that  it  ran  over. 

It  happed  another  day  that  S.  Benet  went  to 
visit  his  sister,  named  Scholastica,  and  as  they  sat 
at  table  she  prayed  her  brother  that  he  would 
abide  there  all  that  night,  but  he  in  no  wise  would 
grant  her,  and  said  he  might  not  live  out  of  his 
cloister.  And  when  she  saw  that  he  would  not 
grant  to  her  to  abide,  she  inclined  her  head  and 
made  her  prayers  to  our  Lord,  and  anon  it  began 
to  thunder  and  to  Jighten,  and  the  air  to  wax  dark 
which  tofore  was  fair  and  clear,  and  a great  rain 
fell  down  so  that  for  nothing  he  might  depart. 
And  like  as  she  wept  with  her  eyes,  right  so 
forthwith  the  rain  and  storm  came,  and  then  she 
lifted  up  her  head.  Then  S.  Benet  said  to  his 
sister:  Almighty  God  forgive  you  that  ye  have 
done,  for  ye  have  letted  me  that  I may  not  depart 
hence.  And  she  said:  Fair  brother,  God  is 
more  courteous  than  ye  be,  for  ye  would  not 
accept  my  prayer,  but  God  hath  heard  me,  now 
go  if  ye  may.  And  then  S.  Benet  abode  there 
all  the  night,  speaking  of  God  between  him  and 
his  sister  without  sleeping,  till  they  were  both 
eased.  On  the  morn  S.  Benet  went  to  his  abbey, 
and  on  the  third  day  he  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven, 
and  saw  the  soul  of  his  sister  mount  up  into  heaven 
in  the  likeness  of  a dove,  and  anon  he  did  the 
body  of  her  to  be  brought  to  his  abbey,  and  did 
it  to  be  buried  in  his  tomb  which  he  had  do  made 
for  himself. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


93 


On  a night  as  S.  Benet  was  in  his  prayer  at  a The 
window,  he  saw  the  soul  of  S.  Germain,  bishop  Life  of 
of  Capua,  mount  into  heaven,  and  like  as  a light  Bcnct 
sudden  that  enlumineth  all  the  darknesses  of  the 
world,  so  the  light  of  that  soul  gave  a great  light ; 
and  after  he  knew  that  the  soul  of  S.  Germain 
passed  that  same  hour.  After  this,  when  time 
came  that  S.  Benet  himself  should  depart  out  of 
this  world,  he  showed  it  to  his  monks  six  days 
tofore,  and  did  do  make  his  pit.  And  after  that 
a fever  took  him  strongly,  which  held  him  every 
day,  and  at  the  sixth  day  he  did  himself  to  be 
borne  to  the  church,  and  there  received  the  body 
of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  after,  among  the 
hands  of  his  disciples,  his  own  hands  lifting  up  to 
heaven  in  making  his  orison,  he  rendered  his  soul 
unto  his  creator.  The  same  hour  was  a revelation 
showed  to  two  monks,  for  they  saw  a way  to 
heaven  all  covered  with  palls  and  mantles  of  gold, 
and  full  of  torches  burning  which  illumined  all  the 
heaven,  which  came  from  the  cell  of  S.  Benet  unto 
heaven.  And  there  was  a man  in  a fair  habit  to 
whom  these  monks  demanded  what  way  that  was, 
and  he  answered  that  it  was  the  way  by  which 
S.  Benet  mounted  up  to  heaven.  Then  the  body 
of  S.  Benet  was  buried  in  the  oratory  that  he  had 
made  of  S.  John,  where  as  was  wont  to  be  the 
altar  of  Apollo,  the  year  of  our  Lord  five  hundred 
and  eighteen.  To  whom  let  us  pray  devoutly 
that  he  pray  to  our  Lord  for  us,  that  we  may 
have  grace  after  this  life  to  come  to  everlasting 
bliss  in  heaven.  Amen. 


y Google 


94 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Cuthbert 


Here  next  followeth  the  Life  of  S.  Cuthbert 
of  Durham . 


S.  Cuthbert  was  born  in  England,  and  when  he 
was  eight  years  old  our  Lord  showed  for  him  a 
fair  miracle  for  to  draw  him  to  his  love.  For  on 
a time,  as  he  played  at  the  ball  with  other  children, 
suddenly  there  stood  among  them  a fair  young  child 
of  the  age  of  three  years,  which  was  the  fairest 
creature  that  ever  they  beheld,  and  anon  he  said  to 
Cuthbert : Good  brother,  use  no  such  vain  plays, 
ne  set  not  thy  heart  on  them.  But  for  all  that 
Cuthbert  took  none  heed  to  his  words,  and  then 
this  child  fell  down  and  made  great  heaviness, 
wept  sore  and  wrung  his  hands,  and  then  Cuthbert 
and  the  other  children  left  their  play  and  com- 
forted him,  and  demanded  of  him  why  he  made 
such  sorrow.  Then  the  child  said  to  Cuthbert : 
All  mine  heaviness  is  only  for  thee,  because  thou 
usest  such  vain  plays,  for  our  Lord  hath  chosen 
thee  to  be  an  head  of  holy  church ; and  then 
suddenly  he  vanished  away.  And  then  he  knew 
verily  that  it  was  an  angel  sent  from  our  Lord  to 
him,  and  from  then  forthon  he  left  all  such  vain 
plays  and  never  used  them  more,  and  began  to  live 
holily.  And  then  he  desired  of  his  father  that 
he  might  be  set  to  school,  and  anon  he  drew  him 
to  perfect  living,  for  he  was  ever  in  his  prayers 
night  and  day,  and  most  desired  of  our  Lord  to 
do  that  which  might  please  him  and  eschew  that 
should  displease  him.  And  he  lived  so  virtuously 
and  holily,  that  all  the  people  had  joy  of  him,  and 
within  a while  after,  Aidanus  the  bishop  died. 
And  as  Cuthbert  kept  sheep  in  the  field,  he 
looked  upward  and  saw  angels  bear  the  soul  of 
Aidanus  the  bishop  to  heaven  with  great  melody. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


95 


And  after  that  S.  Cuthbert  would  no  more  keep  The  Life 
sheep  but  went  anon  to  the  abbey  of  Jervaulx,  of  S-.. 
and  there  he  was  a monk,  of  whom  all  the  convent  ^utnDcrt 
were  right  glad,  and  thanked  our  Lord  that  had 
sent  him  thither.  For  he  lived  there  full  holily, 
in  fasting  and  great  penance  doing.  And  at  last 
he  had  the  gout  in  his  knees,  which  he  had  taken 
of  cold  in  kneeling  upon  the  cold  stones  when  he 
said  his  prayers,  in  such  wise  that  his  knees  began 
to  swell  and  the  sinews  of  his  leg  were  shrunk 
that  he  might  neither  go  nor  stretch  out  his  leg, 
but  ever  he  took  it  full  patiently  and  said : When 
it  pleaseth  our  Lord  it  shall  pass  away. 

And  within  a while  after,  his  brethren  for  to 
do  him  comfort  bare  him  into  the  field,  and  there 
they  met  with  a knight  which  said : Let  me  see 
and  handle  this  Cuthbert’s  leg;  and  then  when 
he  had  felt  it  with  his  hands,  he  bade  them  take 
the  milk  of  a cow  of  one  colour,  and  the  juice  of 
small  plantain,  and  fair  wheat  flour,  and  seethe 
them  all  together,  and  make  thereof  a plaister  and 
lay  it  thereto  and  it  will  make  him  whole.  And 
as  soon  as  they  had  so  done  he  was  perfectly 
whole,  and  then  he  thanked  our  Lord  full 
meekly.  And  after,  he  knew  by  revelation  that 
it  was  an  angel  sent  by  our  Lord  to  heal  him  of 
his  great  sickness  and  disease. 

And  the  abbot  of  that  place  sent  him  to  a cell 
of  theirs  to  be  hosteler,  for  to  receive  their  guests 
and  do  them  comfort,  and  soon  after  our  Lord 
showed  there  a fair  miracle  for  his  servant  S. 
Cuthbert,  for  angels  came  to  him  oft-times  in  like- 
ness of  other  guests,  whom  he  received  and  served 
diligently  with  meat  and  drink  and  other  necessaries. 

On  a time  there  came  guests  to  him  whom  he 
received,  and  went  into  the  houses  of  office  for  to 

VOL.  III.  <5 

Digitized  by  Google 


96 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  serve  them,  and  when  he  came  again  they  were 
of  S.  gone,  and  went  after  for  to  call  and  could  not 
Cutnoert  eSpy  them,  ne  know  the  steps  of  their  feet,  how 
wefl  that  it  was  then  a snow ; and  when  he 
returned  he  found  the  table  laid  and  thereon  three 
fair  white  loaves  of  bread  all  hot  which  were  of 
marvellous  beauty  and  sweetness,  for  all  the  place 
smelled  of  the  sweet  odour  of  them.  Then  he 
knew  well  that  the  angels  of  our  Lord  had  been 
there,  and  rendered  thankings  to  our  Lord  that 
he  had  sent  to  him  his  angels  for  to  comfort  him. 

And  every  night  when  his  brethren  were  abed 
he  would  go  and  stand  in  the  cold  water  all  naked 
up  to  the  chin  till  it  were  midnight,  and  then  he 
would  issue  out,  and  when  he  came  to  land  he 
might  not  stand  for  feebleness  and  faintness,  but 
oft  fell  down  to  the  ground.  And  on  a time  as 
he  lay  thus,  there  came  two  otters  which  licked 
every  place  of  his  body,  and  then  went  again  to 
the  water  that  they  came  from.  And  then  S. 
Cuthbert  arose  all  whole  and  went  to  his  cell 
again,  and  went  to  matins  with  his  brethren.  But 
his  brethren  knew  nothing  of  his  standing  thus 
every  night  in  the  sea  to  the  chin,  but  at  the  last 
one  of  his  brethren  espied  it  and  knew  his  doing, 
and  told  him  thereof,  but  S.  Cuthbert  charged 
him  to  keep  it  secret  and  tell  no  man  thereof 
during  his  life.  And  after  this  within  a while 
the  bishop  of  Durham  died,  and  S.  Cuthbert  was 
elected  and  sacred  bishop  in  his  stead  after  him, 
and  ever  after  he  lived  full  holily  unto  his  death, 
and,  by  his  preaching  and  ensample  giving,  he 
brought  much  people  to  good  living.  And  tofore 
his  death  he  left  his  bishopric  and  went  into  the 
holy  island,  where  he  lived  an  holy  and  solitary 
life,  unto  that  he  being  full  of  virtues,  rendered 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


97 


his  soul  unto  Almighty  God  and  was  buried  at  Feast 
Durham,  and  after  translated,  and  the  body  laid  . 

in  a fair  and  honourable  shrine,  where  as  yet  daily  fton*11101* 
our  Lord  showeth  for  his  servant  there  many  fair 
and  great  miracles.  Wherefore  let  us  pray  unto 
this  holy  saint  that  he  pray  for  us. 


Here  followeth  the  Feast  of  the  Annunciation  or 
Salutation  of  the  Angel  Gabriel  to  our  Lady . 

The  feast  of  this  day  is  called  the  Annunciation 
of  our  Lady,  for  on  this  day  the  angel  Gabriel 
showed  to  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary  the  coming  of 
the  Blessed  Son  of  God.  That  is  to  wit,  how  he 
ought  to  come  into  the  glorious  Virgin,  and  take 
on  her  nature  and  flesh  human  for  to  save  the 
world.  It  was  well  thing  reasonable  that  the 
angel  should  come  to  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary, 
for  like  as  Eve  by  the  exhorting  of  the  devil  gave 
her  consent  to  do  the  sin  of  inobedience  to  our  per- 
dition, right  so  by  the  greeting  of  the  angel 
Gabriel  and  by  exhorting,  the  glorious  Virgin 
Mary  gave  her  consenting  to  his  message  by 
obedience,  to  our  salvation.  Wherefor  like  as 
the  first  woman  was  cause  of  our  damnation,  so 
was  the  blessed  Virgin  Mary  beginning  of  our 
redemption.  When  that  the  angel  Gabriel  was 
sent  for  to  show  the  incarnation  of  our  Saviour 
Jesu  Christ,  he  found  her  alone,  enclosed  in  her 
chamber,  like  as  S.  Bernard  saith,  in  which  the 
maidens  and  virgins  ought  to  abide  in  their  houses, 
without  running  abroad  out  openly,  and  they 
ought  also  to  flee  the  words  of  men,  of  which 
their  honour  and  good  renomee  might  be  leased  or 
hurt.  And  the  angel  said  to  the  glorious  Virgin 
Mary : I salute  thee,  full  of  grace,  the  Lord  is 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


98 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Feast  with  thee.  There  is  not  found  in  Scripture  in 

Annuncia6  n°  Part  8UC^  a 8a^u^nS*  And  xt  was  brought  from 
tloa  heaven  unto  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary,  which  was 
the  first  woman  that  ever  in  the  world  offered  to 
God  first  her  virginity.  And  the  angel  said  to  her 
after : Thou  shalt  be  blessed  above  all  other 
women,  for  thou  shalt  escape  the  malediction  that 
all  other  women  have  in  childing  in  sin  and  in 
sorrow ; and  thou  shalt  be  mother  of  God,  and 
shalt  abide  a pure  virgin  and  clean.  And  our 
blessed  Lady  was  much  abashed  of  this  salutation, 
and  thought  in  herself  the  manner  thereof.  This 
was  a good  manner  of  a virgin  that  so  wisely  held 
her  still  and  spake  not,  and  showing  example  to 
virgins,  which  Ought  not  lightly  to  speak,  ne  with- 
out advice  ne  manner  to  answer.  And  when  the 
angel  knew  that  for  this  salutation  she  was  timorous 
and  abashed,  anon  he  repeaced  her,  saying : Mary, 
be  nothing  afeared,  for  thou  hast  found  soothly 
grace  at  God,  for  thou  art  chosen  above  all  women 
for  to  receive  his  blessed  Son  and  be  mother  to 
God,  and  moyen  and  advocate  for  to  set  peace 
between  God  and  man,  for  to  destroy  the  death 
and  bring  the  life.  O thou  that  art  a virgin,  saith 
S.  Ambrose,  learn  of  Mary  to  be  mannered  and 
fearful  to  all  men,  learn  to  be  still  and  to  eschew 
all  dissolutions. 

Mary  was  afeared  of  the  salutation  of  the  angel, 
the  wftich  said : Thou  shalt  conceive  and  bring 
forth  a son,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus,  and 
he  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God.  And  Mary 
said  to  the  angel:  In  what  manner  may  this  be 
that  thou  sayest?  For  I have  purposed  in  mine 
heart  that  I shall  never  know  man,  and  yet  I never 
knew  none,  how  then  shall  I have  a child  against 
the  course  of  nature,  and  may  abide  a virgin  ? 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


99 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Then  the  angel  informed  her,  and  began  to  6ay  how  Feast 
her  virginity  should  be  saved  in  the  conceiving  of  of  the 
the  Son  of  God,  and  answered  to  her  in  this  Annuncia- 
manner.  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  in  to  thee,  on 
which  shall  make  thee  to  conceive : the  manner 
how  thou  shalt  conceive  thou  shalt  know  better 
than  I shall  con  say,  for  that  shall  be  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  which  of  thy  blood  and  of  thy 
flesh  shall  form  purely  in  the  body  of  the  child 
that  thou  shalt  bear,  and  other  work  to  this  con- 
ception shalt  thou  not  do.  And  the  virtue  of  God 
sovereign  shall  shadow  thee  in  such  wise  that  thou 
shalt  never  feel  in  thee  any  burning  ne  covetise 
carnal,  and  shall  purge  thine  heart  from  all  desires 
temporal,  and  yet  shall  the  Holy  Ghost  shadow 
thee  with  the  mantle  corporal,  that  the  blessed  Son 
of  God  shall  be  hid  in  thee  and  of  thee  for  to 
cover  the  right  excellent  clarte  of  his  divinity; 
so  that  by  this  ombre  or  shadow  may  be  known 
and  seen  his  dignity  ; like  as  Hugh  of  S.  Victor 
and  S.  Bernard  say.  Alter,  the  angel  said  : And 
for  as  much  as  thou  shalt  conceive  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  not  of  man,  the  child  that  shall  be  born 
of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God.  Yet  of 
this  conception  which  is  above  nature,  the  angel 
said  to  her  this  example:  Lo!  Elizabeth  thy 
cousin,  which  is  barren,  hath  conceived  a. child  in 
her  age,  for  there  is  nothing  impossible  to  God, 
which  is  almighty.  Then  said  the  glorious  Virgin 
Mary  to  the  angel  the  answer  for  which  he  was 
come  : Lo ! the  handmaid  of  God,  he  do  to  me 
that  he  hath  ordained  after  thy  words.  She  hath 
given  to  us  example  to  be  humble  when  prosperity 
of  high  riches  cometh  to  us,  for  the  first  word  that 
she  spake  or  said  when  she  was  made  mother  of 
God  and  queen  of  Heaven,  that  was  that  she 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


ICO 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Feast  called  herself  ancille  or  handmaid,  and  not  lady. 

of  the  Much  people  is  humble  in  low  estate  and  but  few 

luncia-  • i • i r r i • . , 

tion  m estate>  that  is  to  wit  m great  estates,  and 

therefore  is  humility  more  praised  in  them  that  be 
great  in  estate,  as  soon  as  she  said : Lo ! here  the 
handmaid  of  God,  let  it  be  done  to  me  after  thy 
words.  Thomas  in  compendio:  In  that  same 
time  that  she  had  thus  given  her  assent  to  the 
angel,  she  conceived  in  her  Jesu  Christ,  which  in 
that  same  hour  was  in  her,  perfect  man  and 
perfect  God  in  one  person ; and  as  wise  as  he  was 
in  heaven,  or  when  he  was  thirty  years  old. 
This  blessed  Annunciation  happened  the  twenty- 
fifth  day  of  the  month  of  March,  on  which  day 
happened  also,  as  well  tofore  as  after,  these  things 
that  hereafter  be  named.  On  that  same  day 
Adam,  the  first  man,  was  created  and  fell  into 
original  sin  by  inobedience,  and  was  put  out  of 
paradise  terrestrial.  After,  the  angel  showed  the 
conception  of  our  Lord  to  the  glorious  Virgin 
Mary.  Also  that  same  day  of  the  month  Cain 
slew  Abel  his  brother.  Also  Melchisedech  made 
offering  to  God  of  bread  and  wine  in  the  presence 
of  Abraham.  Also  on  the  same  day  Abraham 
offered  Isaac  his  son.  That  same  day  S.  John 
Baptist  was  beheaded,  and  S.  Peter  was  that 
day  delivered  out  of  prison,  and  S.  James  the 
more,  that  day  beheaded  of  Herod.  And  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ  was  on  that  day  crucified, 
wherefore  that  is  a day  of  great  reverence.  Of 
the  salutation  that  the  angel  brought  to  the  glorious 
Virgin,  we  read  an  example  of  a noble  knight 
which  for  to  amend  his  life  gave  and  rendered  him- 
self into  an  abbey  of  Citeaux,  and,  forasmuch  as  he 
was  no  clerk,  there  was  assigned  to  him  a master 
for  to  teach  him,  and  to  be  with  the  brethren 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


IOI 


clerks,  but  he  could  nothing  learn  in  long  time  that  Feast 
he  was  there  save  these  two  words : Ave  Maria,  °*  . 

which  words  he  had  so  sore  imprinted  in  his  heart 
that  alway  he  had  them  in  his  mouth  wheresomever 
he  was.  At  last  he  died  and  was  buried  in  the 
churchyard  of  the  brethren.  It  happed  after, 
that  upon  the  burials  grew  a right  fair  fleur-de-lis, 
and  in  every  flower  was  written  in  letters  of  gold  : 

Ave  Maria,  of  which  miracle  all  the  brethren  were 
amarvelled,  and  they  did  open  the  sepulchre,  and 
Fpund  that  the  root  of  this  fleur-de-lis  came  out  of 
the  mouth  of  the  said  knight,  and  anon  they  under- 
stood that  our  Lord  would  have  him  honoured  for 
the  great  devotion  that  he  had  to  say  these  words . 

Ave  Maria.  Another  knight  there  was  that  had 
a fair  place  beside  the  highway  where  much  people 
passed,  whom  he  robbed  as  much  as  he  might,  and 
so  he  used  his  life.  But  he  had  a good  custom, 
for  every  day  he  saluted  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary, 
in  saying : Ave  Maria ; and  for  no  labour  he  left 
not  to  greet  our  Lady,  as  said  is.  It  happed 
that  an  holy  man  passed  by  his  house,  whom  he 
robbed  and  despoiled,  but  that  holy  man  prayed 
them  that  robbed  him  that  they  would  bring  him 
to  their  master  for  he  had  to  speak  with  him  in  his 
house  of  a secret  thing  for  his  profit.  And  when 
the  robbers  heard  that  they  led  him  tofore  the 
knight  their  lord ; and  anon  the  holy  man  prayed 
him  that  he  would  do  come  all  his  meiny  tofore 
him.  And  when  his  meiny  by  the  commandment 
of  the  knight  were  assembled  the  holy  man  said : 

Yet  be  they  not  all  here ; there  is  one  yet  to  come. 

Then  one  of  them  aperceived  that  the  chamberlain 
of  the  lord  was  not  come ; and  anon  the  knight 
made  him  to  come.  And  when  the  holy  man  saw 
him  come  anon  he  said : I conjure  thee  by  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


102 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Seconde 


virtue  of  Jesu  Christ  our  Lord  that  thou  say  to  us 
who  thou  art,  and  for  what  cause  thou  art  come 
hither.  Anon  the  chamberlain  answered : Alas, 
now  must  I say  and  knowledge  myself,  I am  no 
man  but  am  a devil  which  am  in  the  form  of  a man 
and  have  taken  it  fourteen  years,  by  which  space  I 
have  dwelled  with  this  knight,  for  my  master  hath 
sent  me  hither  to  the  end  that  I should  take  heed 
night  and  day  that  if  this  knight  ceased  to  say  the 
salutation,  Ave  Maria,  for  then  I should  strangle  him 
with  mine  own  hand  and  bring  him  to  hell  because 
of  the  evil  life  that  he  hath  led  and  leadeth.  But 
because  he  saith  every  day  this  salutation,  Ave 
Maria,  I might  not  have  him,  and  therefore  I 
abode  here  so  long,  for  there  passeth  him  no  day 
but  that  he  salueth  our  Lady.  When  the  knight 
heard  this  he  was  much  afeard,  and  fell  down  to 
the  feet  of  this  holy  man  and  demanded  pardon  of 
his  sins.  After  this  the  holy  man  said  to  the 
devil : I command  thee  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
that  thou  depart  hence,  and  go  into  another  place 
where  thou  mayst  grieve  ne  annoy  no  man.  Then 
let  us  pray  to  the  glorious  Virgin  Mary  that  she 
keep  us  from  the  devil,  and  that  we  may  by  her 
come  to  the  glory  of  heaven,  to  the  which  bring 
us  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Amen. 

Here  beginneth  the  Life  of  S . Seconde , Knight . 

S.  Seconde  was  a noble  and  valiant  knight  and 
glorious  martyr  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and 
suffered  his  passion  and  was  crowned  with  the 
palm  of  martyrdom  in  city  of  Astence.  By  whose 
glorious  presence  the  said  city  was  embellished, 
and  for  a singular  patron  ennobled.  And 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


103 


this  holy  man  Seconde  was  informed  in  the  The  Life 
faith  of  the  blessed  man  Calocerus,  which  was  ®f  S* 
holden  in  prison  by  the  provost  Saprice  in  the  Seconde 
said  city  of  Astence.  And  when  Marcianus  was 
holden  in  prison  in  the  city  of  Tredonence, 

Saprice  the  provost  would  go  thither  for  to  make 
him  to  sacrifice,  and  S.  Seconde  much  desiring  to 
see  S.  Marcian,  went  with  him  as  it  had  been 
because  of  solace.  And  anon  as  they  were  out  of 
the  city  of  Astence  a white  dove  descended  upon 
S.  Seconders  head,  to  whom  Saprice  said:  See, 

Seconde,  how  our  gods  love  thee,  which  send 
birds  from  heaven  to  visit  thee.  And  when  they 
came  to  the  river  of  Tanaro,  S.  Seconde  saw  the 
angel  of  God  going  upon  the  flood  and  saying  to 
him : Seconde,  see  that  thou  hast  firm  faith,  and 
thus  shalt  thou  go  above  them  that  worship  idols. 

Then  Saprice  said : Brother  Seconde,  I hear  the 
gods  speaking  to  thee,  to  whom  Seconde  said: 

Let  us  walk  unto  the  desires  of  our  heart.  And 
when  they  came  to  another  flood  that  hight  Burin, 
that  same  angel  aforesaid  said : Seconde  believest 
thou  in  God  or  peradventure  thou  doubtest  ? To 
whom  Seconde  said : I believe  verily  the  truth  of 
his  passion.  Then  said  Saprice  : What  is  that  I 
hear  ? and  Seconde  said  nothing.  When  they 
should  enter  into  Tredonence,  by  the  command- 
ment of  the  angel,  Marcianus  issued  out  of  prison 
and  appeared  to  Seconde,  saying : Seconde,  enter 
into  the  way  of  truth  and  receive  the  victory  of 
faith.  Saprice  said : Who  is  he  that  speaketh  to 
us  as  it  were  in  a dream?  To  whom  Seconde 
said : It  may  be  well  to  thee  a dream,  but  to  me 
it  is  admonition  and  a comfort.  After  this, 

Seconde  went  to  Milan,  and  the  angel  of  God 
brought  Faustin  and  Jonathan,  which  were  holden 


Digitized  by  Google 


104 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Seconde 


in  prison,  out  of  the  city  to  Seconde,  and  of  them 
he  received  baptism  and  a cloud  ministered  water 
for  to  baptize  him  with.  And  suddenly  a dove 
descended  from  heaven,  bringing  unto  F austin  and 
Jonathan  the  blessed  sacrament,  and  Faustin 
delivered  it  to  Seconde  for  to  bear  it  to  Marcian. 
Then  Seconde  returned  when  it  was  night,  and 
went  to  the  river  named  Pade,  and  the  angel  of 
our  Lord  took  the  bridle  of  the  horse  and  led  him 
over  the  river,  and  led  him  unto  Tredonence,  and 
set  him  in  the  prison  where  Marcian  was.  And 
Seconde  delivered  to  Marcian  the  gift  that  Faustin 
had  sent  to  him,  and  receiving  it  said : The 
blessed  body  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  be  with  me 
into  everlasting  life.  Then,  by  the  commandment 
of  the  angel,  Seconde  went  out  of  prison  and  went 
unto  his  lodging.  After  this  Marcian  received 
sentence  to  have  his  head  smitten  off,  and  so  it 
was  done.  And  then  Seconde  took  his  body  and 
buried  it.  And  when  Saprice  heard  thereof  he 
did  do  call  Seconde  to  him  and  said:  By  this 
that  I see  thee  do,  I see  well  that  thou  art  a 
Christian  man.  To  whom  Seconde  said : Verily 
I knowledge  me  to  be  a Christian  man ; then 
Saprice  said : Lo  ! how  desirest  thou  to  die  an 
evil  death  ? To  whom  Seconde  said : That 
death  is  more  due  to  thee  than  to  me ; and  when 
Seconde  would  not  sacrifice  to  the  idols  he  com- 
manded him  to  be  despoiled  all  naked,  and  anon 
the  angel  of  God  was  ready,  and  clad  him  in  a 
better  clothing  than  he  had  tofore.  Then  Saprice 
commanded  him  to  be  hanged  on  an  instrument 
named  eculeus,  of  which  two  ends  stand  on  the 
ground,  and  two  upward  like  S.  Andrew’s  cross, 
and  thereon  he  was  hanged  till  his  arms  were  out 
of  joint,  but  our  Lord  restored  him  anon  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


105 

health.  And  then  he  was  commanded  to  go  in  to  The  Life 
prison,  and  when  he  was  there  the  angel  of  our  of  S. 
Lord  came  to  him  and  said : Arise,  Seconde,  and  5560011 
follow  me  and  I shall  lead  thee  to  thy  maker. 

And  he  led  him  from  thence  unto  the  city  of 
Astence,  and  brought  him  into  the  prison  where 
Calocerus  was,  and  our  blessed  Saviour  with  him. 

And  when  Seconde  saw  him  he  fell  down  at  his 
feet,  and  our  Saviour  said  to  him  : Be  not  afeard, 

Seconde,  for  I am  thy  Lord  God  that  shall  keep 
thee  from  all  evil.  And  then  he,  blessing  him, 
ascended  to  heaven.  On  the  morn  Saprice  sent 
unto  the  prison  which  they  found  fast  shut,  but 
they  found  not  Seconde.  Then  Saprice  went 
from  Tredonence  the  city  unto  Astence  for  to 
punish  Calocerus,  and  when  he  was  come  he  sent 
for  him  to  be  presented  tofore  him,  and  they  said 
to  him  that  Seconde  was  with  him,  and  anon  he 
commanded  that  they  should  be  brought  tofore 
him,  to  whom  he  said : Because  that  my  gods 
know  you  to  be  despisers  of  them,  they  will  that 
ye  both  die  together.  And,  because  they  would 
not  do  sacrifice  to  his  gods,  he  did  do  melt  pitch 
and  rosin,  and  commanded  it  to  be  cast  upon 
their  heads  and  in  their  mouths.  They  drank  it 
with  great  desire,  as  it  had  been  most  sweetest 
water,  and  said  with  a clear  voice:  O Lord 
how  thy  words  be  sweet  in  our  mouths.  Then 
Saprice  gave  upon  them  sentence,  that  S.  Seconder  - 
should  be  beheaded  in  the  city  of  Astence^da 
Calocerus  should  be  sent  to  Albigany  ap^there 
to  be  punished.  When  then  S.  S^fonde  was 
beheaded,  the  angels  of  our  Lord  topk  his  body 
and  buried  it  with  much  worslpf^and  praising. 

He  suffered  his  death  the  th^cf  calends  of  April. 

Let  us  pray  then  that  he^pray  for  us  to  our  Lord. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Mary 
of  Egypt 


106  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Here  beginneth  the  life  of  Mary  of  Egypt . 

Mary  the  Egyptian,  which  was  called  a sinner, 
led  and  lived  the  most  straight  life  and  sharp  that 
might  be,  forty-seven  years  in  desert.  In  that 
time  was  a good,  holy  and  religious  monk  named 
Zosimus,  and  went  through  the  desert  which  lieth 
beyond  the  Horn  Jordan  and  much  desired  to  find 
some  holy  fathers.  And,  when  he  came  far  and 
deep  in  the  desert,  he  found  a creature  which  was 
all  black  over  all  her  body,  of  the  great  heat  and 
burning  of  the  sun,  which  went  in  that  desert,  and 
that  was  this  Mary  Egyptiaca  aforesaid.  But  as 
soon  as  she  saw  Zosimus  come,  she  fled,  and 
Zosimus  after.  And  she  tarried  and  said : Abbot 
Zosimus,  wherefore  followest  thou  me  ? Have 
pity  and  mercy  on  me,  for  I dare  not  turn  my 
face  toward  thee,  because  I am  a woman  and 
also  naked,  but  cast  thy  mantle  upon  me,  by  which 
I may  then,  without  shame,  look  and  speak  with 
thee.  And  when  Zosimus  heard  himself  named 
he  was  greatly  amarvelled,  and  anon  he  cast  to 
her  his  mantle,  and  humbly  prayed  her  that  she 
would  give  to  him  her  blessing;  and  she  answered: 
It  appertained  to  thee  fair  father  to  give  the 
benediction,  and  nothing  to  me,  for  thou  hast 
the  dignity  of  priesthood.  When  he  heard  that 
she  knew  his  name  and  his  office,  he  had  yet 
more  marvel,  and  of  that  she  asked  so  meekly  his 
tlessing.  After,  she  said:  Blessed  be  God  the 
betterr  of  our  souls.  Then  she  lift  up  her  hands 
commanden  in  making  her  prayer,  and  Zosimus 
named  eoi  praying  to  God  her  body  was  lift  up 
ground,  and  th  well  nigh  a foot  and  a half,  and 
and  thereon  he  w&>  it  had  been  some  evil  spirit, 
of  joint,  but  our  LorJ\er  by  the  virtue  of  God 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


107 


that  she  should  tell  to  him  her  estate  and  her  The 
condition,  and  she  answered:  Fair  father,  spare 
me  thereof,  for  if  I should  recount  mine  estate  ye  0f  Egypt 
should  flee  away  from  me  like  as  from  a venomous 
serpent,  and  thy  holy  ears  should  be  made  foul  of 
my  words,  and  the  air  should  be  full  and  foul 
of  corruption.  And  when  she  saw  that  Zosimus 
would  not  be  satisfied  so,  then  she  said:  Fair 
father  I was  born  in  Egypt,  and  when  I was  in 
the  age  of  twelve  years  I went  into  Alexandria, 
and  there  I gave  my  body  oj>enly  to  sin  by  the 
space  of  seventeen  years,  and  abandoned  it  to 
lechery  and  refused  no  man.  After,  it  happed 
that  men  of  that  country  went  for  to  adore  and 
worship  the  holy  cross  in  Jerusalem,  and  I prayed 
to  one  of  the  mariners  that  he  would  suffer  me  to 
pass  with  the  other  people  the  sea,  and  when  he 
me  demanded  payment  for  my  passage,  I answered : 

Fair  sirs,  I have  nothing  to  pay  you  with,  but  I 
abandon  my  body  to  do  withal  your  pleasure  for 
my  passage,  and  they  took  me  by  that  condition ; 
and  when  I was  come  into  Jerusalem  unto  the 
entry  of  the  church  for  to  worship  the  holy  cross 
with  the  others,  I was  suddenly  and  invisibly  put 
aback  many  times,  in  such  wise  that  I might  not 
enter  into  the  church.  And  then  I returned  and 
thought  in  myself  that  this  came  to  me  for  the 
great  sins  that  I had  committed  in  time  past,  and 
began  to  smite  my  breast  and  weep  tenderly  and 
sigh  grievously.  And  I beheld  there  the  image 
of  our  Lady,  and  I fell  down  and  prayed  her  all 
weeping  that  she  would  impetre  and  get  me 
pardon  of  my  sins  of  her  sweet  Son,  and  would 
suffer  me  to  enter  into  the  church  for  to  worship 
the  holy  cross,  promising  to  forsake  the  world,  and 
and  from  then  forthon  to  five  chaste.  When  I 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  had  thus  prayed,  and  to  our  blessed  Lady  thus 
°*  faithfully  promised,  I went  again  to  the  doors  of 
of  Egypt  c^urc^  aQd  without  any  impediment  I entered 
into  the  church.  And  when  I had  devoutly 
worshipped  and  adored  the  holy  cross,  a man  gave 
to  me  three  pence,  of  which  I bought  three  loaves  of 
bread.  And  after,  I heard  anon  a voice  : If  thou 
wilt  pass  and  go  over  horn  Jordan  thou  shalt  be 
safe,  and  then  I passed  Jordan,  and  came  into  this 
desert,  where  I never  saw  man  by  the  space  of  seven- 
teen years.  These  three  loaves,  that  I bare  with 
me,  became  hard,  by  the  drought  of  the  time,  as  a 
stone,  of  which  I took  my  sustenance,  and  sufficed 
to  me  seventeen  years,  and  after,  I ate  herbs.  My 
clothes  be  rotten  long  sith,  and  these  seventeen  first 
years  I was  much  tempted  by  the  burning  of  the 
sun  much  asprely,  and  many  delectations  that  I have 
had  in  meat  and  drink,  the  good  wines,  and  doing 
the  desires  of  my  body,  all  these  came  in  my 
thought.  Then  I bewailed  them  on  the  earth,  and 
prayed  for  help  to  our  blessed  Lady  in  whom  I had 
set  all  my  affiance,  and  I wept  much  tenderly. 
And  anon  I saw  coming  about  me  a great  light, 
by  the  which  I was  all  recomforted,  and  lost  all 
the  thoughts  which  oft  and  grievously  tempted  me. 
And  sith,  I have  been  delivered  of  all  temptations 
and  am  nourished  of  spiritual  meat  of  the  word 
of  our  Lord.  And  thus  have  I been  all  my  life 
as  I have  told  to  thee,  and  I pray  thee  by  the 
incarnation  of  Jesu  Christ  that  thou  pray  for  me, 
sinful  creature.  Then  the  old  father  Zosimus  fell 
down  unto  ground,  and  thanked  our  Lord  God 
that  had  thus  saved  his  servant.  And  she  said : 
I pray  thee  fair  father  that  thou  wilt  come  again 
on  the  next  Shere-Thursday,  and  bring  with  thee 
the  body  of  our  Lord  for  to  housel  me,  for  sith 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


109 


I entered  into  this  desert  I was  never  houseled  The 
ne  received  the  holy  sacrament,  and  then  I shall  Life  of 
come  to  flora  Jordan  against  thee.  Zozimus  went 
to  his  abbey,  and,  after  the  year  passed,  on  Shere- 
Thursday  he  came  again  in  to  the  place  like  as 
the  holy  woman  had  prayed  him.  And  when  he 
was  come  to  Horn  Jordan  he  saw  on  that  other 
side  the  holy  woman,  which  made  the  sign  of  the 
cross  upon  the  water  and  went  on  it,  and  came 
over  to  him.  When  Zosimus  saw  this  miracle, 
anon  he  fell  down  to  the  feet  of  the  holy  woman 
for  to  do  to  her  honour  and  reverence,  but  she 
forbade  and  defended  him  and  said  : Thus  oughtest 
thou  not  to  do,  for  thou  art  a priest,  and  bearest 
the  holy  sacrament.  The  which  she  received  in 
right  great  devotion,  and  said  in  weeping : Lord 
God  please  it  to  thee  to  receive  me  in  peace  for 
jnine  eyes  have  seen  my  Saviour.  How  well  that 
she  had  always  wept  and  shed  tears  so  abundantly 
that  it  seemed  that  she  had  lost  her  sight.  And 
after,  she  said  to  Zosimus:  I pray  thee  that  at 
the  end  of  this  year  thou  wilt  come  hither  again 
to  me  and  pray  for  me,  sinful  creature,  and  anon 
after,  she  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  the  river 
and  passed  over  the  water  with  dry  feet  as  she 
tofore  came.  And  Zosimus  went  again  to  his 
abbey,  but  he  repented  much  that  he  had  not 
demanded  the  name  of  the  woman.  And  after 
the  year  passed  he  came  again  to  the  desert,  like 
as  he  had  promised  to  this  holy  woman,  and  he 
found  her  dead,  and  the  body  ordinately  laid  as 
it  should  be  buried.  Zosimus  began  then  anon 
tenderly  to  weep,  and  durst  not  approach  ne  touch 
the  body,  but  said  to  himself:  1 would  gladly 
bury  this  holy  body  if  I knew  that  I should  not 
displease  her.  And  when  he  was  in  this  thought 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


no 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  he  saw  lying  by  her  head  a letter,  that  said  in  this 
of  S.  manner  : Zosimus,  bury  right  here  the  body  of  the 
Ambrose  p00r  ^ary  and  render  to  the  earth  his  right,  and 
pray  to  God  for  me,  at  whose  commandment  the 
second  day  after  I received  him,  he  called  me 
from  this  world.  Then  Zosimus  was  much  glad 
that  he  knew  the  name  of  the  saint,  but  he  was 
greatly  dismayed  how  he  might  bury  the  body, 
for  he  had  nothing  for  to  delve  the  earth  with. 
And  anon  he  saw  the  earth  dolven,  and  a sepulchre 
made  by  a lion  that  came  thither.  And  then 
Zosimus  buried  her,  and  the  lion  departed  debon- 
airly, and  Zosimus  returned  to  his  abbey  and 
recounted  to  his  brethren  the  conversation  of  this 
holy  woman  Mary.  And  Zosimus  lived  an 
hundred  years  in  holy  life,  and  gave  laud  to  God 
of  all  his  gifts,  and  his  goodness  that  he  receiveth 
sinners  to  mercy,  which  with  good  heart  turn  to 
him,  and  promiseth  to  them  the  joy  of  heaven. 
Then  let  us  pray  to  this  holy  Mary  the  Egyptian 
that  we  may  be  here  so  penitent  that  we  may 
come  thither. 


Here  followeth  of  S.  Ambrose , and first  the 
interpretation  of  his  name . 

Ambrose  is  said  of  a stone  named  ambra,  which 
is  much  sweet,  odorant  and  precious,  and  also  it 
is  much  precious  in  the  church,  and  much  sweet 
smelling  in  deeds  and  in  words.  Or  Aonbrose 
may  be  said  of  ambra  and  syos  which  is  as  much 
to  say  as  God,  for  Ambrose  is  as  much  to  say  as 
amber  of  God,  for  Ajnbrose  felt  God  in  him,  and 
God  was  smelled  and  odoured  by  him  over  all 
Ivhere  as  he  was.  Or  he  was  said  of  ambor  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


hi 


Greek,  which  is  to  say  as  father  of  light,  and  of  The  Life 
sior,  that  is  a little  child  that  is  a father  of  many  of  S. 
sons  by  spiritual  generation,  clear  and  full  of  light  Ambrose 
in  exposition  of  holy  Scripture,  and  was  little  in 
his  humble  conversation.  Or  thus  as  is  said  in  the 
glossary,  Ambrose  is  odour  and  savour  celestial, 
he  was  odour  of  heaven  by  great  renomee  smell- 
ing, savour  by  contemplation  within  him,  an 
honeycomb  by  sweet  exposition  of  scriptures, 
meat  of  angels  by  his  glorious  life.  And  Paulinus, 
bishop  of  Volusian,  wrote  his  life  unto  S.  Austin. 

Of  the  Life  of  S.  Ambrose . 

S.  Ambrose  was  son  of  Ambrose,  provost  of 
Rome,  of  whom  it  happed  as  he  lay  in  his  cradle 
in  the  hall  of  the  praetorium,  that  there  came  a 
swarm  of  bees  which  fell  on  his  visage  and  his 
mouth,  and  after,  they  departed  and  flew  up  in  the 
air  so  high  that  they  might  not  be  seen.  When 
this  was  done,  the  father,  which  was  hereof  dis- 
mayed, said  : If  this  child  live,  there  shall  be  some 
great  thing  of  him.  After,  when  he  was  a little 
grown,  he  beheld  his  mother  and  his  sister,  which 
was  a sacred  virgin,  kiss  the  priests*  hand  when 
they  offered,  and  he  playing  with  his  sister  put 
forth  his  hand  for  to  kiss,  and  said  that  so  be- 
hoved her  to  do  to  him-  And  she,  not  under- 
standing him*  refused  it.  After,  he  was  set  to 
school  at  Rome,  and  became  to  be  so  good  a clerk 
that  he  determined  the  causes  of  the  palace,  and 
therefore  Valentinian  the  emperor  delivered  him 
to  govern,  two  provinces  named  Liguria  and 
-d£milia.  Then  when  he  came  into  Milan  it 
happed  that  the  bishop  was  dead,  and  the  people 
were  assembled  to  provide  for  another,  but,  be- 

VOL.  111.  h 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


112 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  tween  the  Arians  and  the  good  Christian  men,  for 
S.  the  election,  fell  a great  sedition  and  discord.  And 
Ambrose  Ambrose  for  to  appease  this  sedition  went  thither, 
and  the  voice  of  a child  was  heard  saying : Am- 
brose ought  to  be  bishop : and  anon  all  the  people 
accorded  thereto  wholly,  and  began  for  to  cry : 
Ambrose ! Ambrose ! But  Ambrose  defended  as 
much  as  he  might,  and  alway  the  people  cried: 
Ambrose ! Then  for  to  make  the  people  cease, 
he  went  out  of  the  church,  and  went  up  on  a 
scaffold,  and  made  the  people  to  be  beaten,  against 
the  usage  and  custom,  for  to  let  them,  that  they 
should  name  him  no  more.  But  yet  they  left  not 
for  all  that,  but  the  people  said : Thy  sin  be  upon 
us.  Then  he  being  sore  troubled,  went  home, 
and  suffered  common  women  to  enter  openly  into 
his  house,  to  the  end  that  when  the  people  saw 
that,  they  should  revoke  their  election ; but  for  all 
that  they  cried  as  they  did  tofore  and  said  : Thy 
sins  be  upon  us.  When  S.  Ambrose  saw  that  he 
might  not  empesh  the  election  he  fled  away,  but 
the  people  awaited  upon  him  and  took  him  at  the 
issue  of  the  gate,  and  kept  him  so  long  till  they 
had  grant  of  the  emperor.  And  when  the 
emperor  knew  hereof  he  had  great  joy,  because 
that  the  judge  that  he  had  sent  for  the  provinces 
was  chosen  to  be  their  bishop,  and  also  he  was 
glad  because  his  word  was  accomplished,  for  the 
emperor  said  to  Ambrose  when  he  sent  him 
thither : Go,  said  he,  and  abide  not  there  as  a 
judge  but  as  a bishop.  S.  Ambrose  in  the  mean- 
while that  they  abode  the  answer  of  the  emperor 
fled  yet  away,  but  he  was  taken  again  and  was 
baptized,  for  he  was  not  tofore  baptized,  how  well 
that  he  was  Christian  in  will.  And  the  eighth  day 
after  he  was  consecrate  and  stalled  bishop  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  113 

Milan.  And  four  years  after  that  he  went  to  The  Life 
Rome,  and  there  his  sister,  the  virgin,  kissed  his  of  S. 
hand  as  of  a priest,  and  he  smiling  said : Lo ! as  Aml)rose 
I told  thee,  now  thou  kissest  my  hand  as  of  a 
priest. 

It  happed  after  that,  when  S.  Ambrose  went 
to  another  city  to  the  election  of  a bishop,  Justina 
the  empress,  and  others  of  the  sect  of  the  Arians 
would  not  consent  to  the  good  Christian  men,  but 
would  have  one  of  their  sect.  Then  one  of  the 
virgins  of  the  empress,  much  fair,  took  S.  Ambrose 
and  drew  him  by  his  vestments  and  would  have 
made  him  to  be  beaten  because  he  would  not  hold 
the  party  of  the  women.  Then  S.  Ambrose  said 
to  her : If  I be  not  worthy  to  be  a bishop,  yet 
thou  oughtest  not  to  lay  hand  upon  me  ne  none 
other  bishop,  thou  hast  laid  hand  on  me,  thou 
oughtest  much  redoubt  and  dread  the  judgment 
of  God.  And  therefore  God  confirmed  his  sen- 
tence on  her,  for  the  next  day  she  was  borne  to 
her  grave  and  was  dead.  Thus  was  she  rewarded 
for  the  villainy  that  she  had  done,  and  all  the 
other  were  thereby  sore  afraid.  After  this,  when 
he  was  returned  to  Milan  he  suffered  many  assaults 
and  persecutions  of  the  empress  Justina,  for  she 
moved,  by  gifts  and  by  honours,  much  people 
against  S.  Ambrose,  and  many  there  were  that 
enforced  them  to  send  him  in  exile,  and  among 
all  others  there  was  one  mounted  in  so  great 
madness  and  fury  against  him,  that  he  hired  him 
an  house  by  the  church  because  he  would  have 
therein  a cart  for  to  set  S.  Ambrose  thereon  and 
lead  him  in  to  exile.  But  that  same  fell  to  him, 
for  he  himself  was  sent  in  exile  in  the  same  cart 
the  same  day  that  he  would  have  led  away  S. 
Ambrose.  To  whom  yet  S.  Ambrose  did  good 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


1 14:  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  Life  for  evil,  for  he  ministered  to  him  his  costs  and 
ofS.  necessaries.  S.  Ambrose  also  estabEshed  in  the 
Ambrose  8Qng  and  offices  at  Milan  first. 

There  were  at  that  time  in  Milan  many  men 
vexed  and  beset  with  devils,  which  cried  with 
high  voice  that  S.  Ambrose  tormented  them  thus, 
but  the  empress  Justina  and  the  Arians  said  that 
S.  Ambrose  made  them  to  say  so  for  money  that 
he  gave  to  them.  Then  it  happed  that  one  of  the 
Arians  was  out  of  his  mind  and  said  thus : Be 
they  all  tormented  as  I am  that  consent  not  to 
S.  Ambrose,  and  therefore  the  other  Arians 
drowned  him  in  a deep  piscine  or  pit.  There  was 
another  heretic  and  an  Arian,  a sharp  man  and  so 
hard  that  he  was  inconvertible,  because  no  man 
might  convert  him  to  the  faith.  On  a time  he 
heard  S.  Ambrose  preach,  and  he  saw  at  his  ear  an 
angel  that  told  him  all  that  he  preached,  and  when 
he  had  perceived  this  he  began  to  sustain  the  faith 
to  which  he  had  been  contrary. 

After  this  it  happed  that  an  enchanter  called 
devils  to  him  and  sent  them  to  S.  Ambrose  for  to 
annoy  and  grieve  him,  but  the  devils  returned  and 
said  that  they  might  not  approach  to  his  gate 
because  there  was  a great  fire  all  about  his  house. 
And  this  enchanter,  after,  when  he  was  tormented 
of  the  provost  for  certain  trespasses,  he  cried  and 
said  that  he  was  tormented  of  S.  Ambrose. 

There  was  a man  that  had  a devil  within  him, 
and  after  went  to  Milan,  and  anon,  as  he  entered 
the  city,  the  devil  left  him,  and  as  soon  as  he  went 
out  of  the  city  the  devil  re-entered  in  him  again. 
Then  he  demanded  him  why  he  did  so,  and  he 
answered  because  he  was  afeard  of  Ambrose. 

After,  it  happed  that  a man  being  conducted 
and  hired  of  Justina  the  empress,  went  to  the  bed- 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


Ix5 


side  of  S.  Ambrose  and  would  have  put  and  riven 
his  sword  through,  his  body,  but  anon  his  arm  was 
dried  up.  Another  that  was  vexed  with  a devil 
said  that  S.  Ambrose  tormented  him,  but  S. 
Ambrose  made  him  to  be  still,  for  Ambrose  tor- 
menteth  none*  but  that  doth  the  envy  of  thee,  for 
thou  seest  men  ascend  from  whence  thou  art 
fallen,  and  that  is  it  which  tormenteth  thee,  for 
Ambrose  cannot  be  so  blown  and  swollen  as  thou 
art ; then  was  he  still  and  spake  not. 

When  S.  Ambrose  went  into  the  town  he  saw 
a man  laugh  because  he  saw  another  fall,  then  said 
Ambrose  to  him : Thou  that  laughest,  beware 
that  thou  fall  not  also,  and  after  he  fell,  and  thus 
was  he  taught  that  he  should  not  mock  his  fellow. 
On  a time  S.  Ambrose  went  unto  the  palace  for 
to  pray  for  a poor  man,  but  the  judge  made  to 
close  the  gate  that  he  might  not  enter  in  ; then  S. 
Ambrose  said  : Thou  shah  come  for  to  enter  into 
the  church,  but  thou  shalt  not  enter,  and  yet  shall 
the  gates  be  open.  And  so  it  happed  that  after,  the 
judge  doubted  his  enemies  and  went  to  the  church, 
but  he  might  not  enter  in,  and  yet  the  gates  were 
open. 

S.  Ambrose  was  of  so  great  abstinence  that  he 
fasted  every  day  save  the  Sunday  or  a solemn  feast. 
He  was  of  so  great  largess  that  he  gave  all  to  poor 
people  and  retained  nothing  for  himself.  He  was 
of  so  great  compassion  that  when  any  confessed  to 
him  his  sin,  he  wept  so  bitterly  that  he  would 
make  the  sinner  to  weep.  He  was  of  So  great 
doubt  that,  When  it  was  told  to  him  of  the  death 
of  any  bishop,  he  would  weep  so  sore  that  unnethe 
he  might  be  comforted,  and  when  it  was  demanded 
him  why  he  wept  for  the  death  of  good  men,  for 
he  ought  better  to  make  joy  because  they  went  to 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Ambrose 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


ii  6 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  heaven,  then  he  answered : I weep  not  because 
Ambr  ^ t^iey  S°  to^ore  me>  but  because  that  unnethe  and 
8e  with  great  pain  may  any  be  found  for  to  do  well 
such  offices.  He  was  of  so  great  steadfastness 
and  so  established  in  his  purpose  that  he  would 
not  leave,  for  dread  ne  for  grief  that  might  be  done 
to  him,  to  reprove  the  emperor  ne  the  other  great 
men  when  they  did  things  that  they  ought  not  to 
do,  ne  he  would  flatter  no  man.  There  was 
brought  once  tofore  him  a man  which  was  griev- 
ously mismade  ; then  said  S.  Ambrose  : The  body 
must  be  delivered  to  the  devil  and  that  the  flesh 
go  to  the  death,  by  which  the  spirit  may  be  saved. 
Unnethe  was  the  word  out  of  his  mouth  but  the 
devil  began  to  torment  him. 

After,  as  it  is  said,  on  a time  he  went  to  Rome, 
and  when  he  was  on  a time  by  the  way  harboured 
with  a rich  man,  S.  Ambrose  began  to  demand 
him  of  his  estate.  That  rich  man  answered : Sir, 
mine  estate  is  happy  enough  and  glorious,  for  I have 
riches  enough,  servants,  varlets,  children,  nephews, 
cousins,  friends,  and  kinsmen  which  serve  me,  and 
all  my  works  and  besoins  come  to  my  will,  ne  I 
have  never  thing  that  may  anger  ne  trouble  me. 
Then  said  S.  Ambrose  to  them  that  were  with  him  : 
Flee  we  hence,  for  our  Lord  God  is  not  here, 
haste  you  fair  children,  haste  you  and  let  us  abide 
here  no  longer  lest  the  vengeance  of  God  take  us, 
and  that  we  be  not  wrapped  in  the  sins  of  these 
people.  They  departed  and  fled  anon,  but  they 
were  not  gone  far  but  that  the  earth  opened  and 
swallowed  in  all  the  house  of  this  rich  man,  and 
there  abode  not  as  much  as  the  step  ne  of  himself  ne 
of  all  that  ever  he  had.  Then  said  S.  Ambrose  : 
behold  fair  children  how  great  pity  and  how  great 
mercy  God  doth  to  them  that  have  adversity  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


ii7 

this  world,  and  how  wroth  he  is  to  them  that  have  The  Life 
the  wealth  and  riches  of  this  world.  Of  which  of  S. 
thing  appeareth  yet  the  pit  or  foss  which  endureth  ^m^rose 
into  this  day  in  witness  of  this  adventure. 

When  S.  Ambrose  beheld  that  avarice,  which 
is  root  of  all  evils,  grew  more  and  more  in  much 
people,  and  specially  in  great  men  and  in  them 
that  were  in  most  great  estate,  which  sold  all  for 
money,  and  with  the  ministers  of  the  church  he 
saw  simony  reign,  he  began  to  pray  to  God  that 
he  would  take  him  away  from  the  miseries  of  this 
world,  and  he  impetred  that  which  he  desired. 

Then  he  called  his  fellowship,  and  said  to  them,  in 
joying,  that,  he  should  abide  with  them  unto  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord.  And  a little  tofore 
that  he  lay  sick,  as  he  expounded  to  his  notary  the 
forty-fourth  psalm,  suddenly,  in  the  presence  and 
sight  of  his  notary,  a fire  in  the  manner  of  a shield 
covered  his  head  and  entered  into  his  mouth. 

Then  became  his  face  as  white  as  any  snow,  and 
anon  after  it  came  again  to  his  first  form,  and  that 
day  he  left  his  writing  and  inditing.  Then  began 
his  malady  to  grieve  him,  and  the  Earl  of  Italy 
which  was  then  at  Milan  called  the  gentlemen  of 
the  country,  and  said  to  them  that  if  so  great  and 
good  a man  should  go  from  them  it  should  be 
great  pity  and  great  peril  to  all  Italy,  and  said  to 
them  that  they  all  should  go  with  him  to  this  holy 
man  and  pray  him  that  he  would  get  grant  of  our 
Lord  of  space  and  longer  life.  When  S.  Ambrose 
had  heard  their  request  he  answered : F air  sons, 

I have  not  so  lived  among  you  that  I am  ashamed 
to  live  if  it  please  God,  ne  I have  no  fear  ne 
dread  of  death,  for  we  have  a good  Lord.  In 
this  time  assembled  his  four  deacons  and  began  to 
treat  who  should  be  a good  bishop  after  him,  and 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


il8  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  Life  they  named  secretly  among  themselves,  that  unnethe 
S.  they  themselves  heard  it,  Simplician.  S.  Ambrose 

Anunroie  wa8  far  from  them,  they  weened  that  he  might  not 
have  heard  them,  and  he  cried  on  high  thrice : 
He  is  old  and  he  is  good.  When  they  heard  him 
they  were  much  abashed  and  departed,  and  sith 
after  his  death  they  chose  the  same  Simplician  for 
the  good  witness  that  S.  Ambrose  had  borne  of 
him. 

A bishop  which  was  named  Honorius,  that  abode 
the  death  of  S.  Ambrose,  slept  and  heard  a voice 
that  thrice  called  him  and  6aid  : Arise  thou  up  for 
he  shall  go  his  way  anon.  Then  he  arose  anon 
hastily  and  went  to  Milan  and  gave  to  him  the 
holy  sacrament,  the  precious  body  of  our  Lord. 
And  anon  S.  Ambrose  laid  his  arms  in  form  of  a 
cross  and  made  his  prayers,  and  so  departed  and 
gave  up  his  ghost  among  the  words  of  his  prayers, 
about  the  year  of  our  Lord  three  hundred  and 
eighty,  the  vigil  of  Easter.  And  when  his  body 
in  the  night  was  borne  in  to  the  church  niany 
children  that  were  baptized,  saw  him,  as  they  said, 
sitting  in  a chair  honorably,  and  others  showed 
him  with  their  fingers  to  their  father  and  others, 
and  some  said  that  they  saw  a star  upon  his  body. 
There  was  a priest,  that  sat  at  meat  with  others, 
which  said  not  well  of  him,  but  missaid,  but  anon 
God  so  chastised  him  that  he  was  borne  from  the 
table  and  died  anon  after.  In  the  city  of  Carthage 
were  three  bishops  together  at  dinner,  and  one  of 
them  spake  evil  by  detraction  of  S.  Ambrose,  and 
there  was  a man  that  told  what  was  befallen  for 
such  language  to  this  aforesaid  priest,  but  he 
mocked  and  japed  so  much  that  he  felt  a stroke 
mortal;  that  that  same  day  he  died  and  was 
buried. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


119 

It  is  found  written  in  a chronicle  that  the  The  Life 
emperor  Valentinian  was  wroth  because  that  in  the  of  S. 
city  of  Thessalonica  the  people  had  stoned  to  Am*>ro*e 
death  his  judges  that  were  sent  thither  in  his 
name,  and  for  to  avenge  the  same  the  emperor  did 
do  slay  five  thousand  persons,  great  and  little,  good 
and  evil,  and  as  well  them  that  had  not  trespassed 
as  them  that  had  deserved  it.  And  when  after 
this  occision  he  came  to  Milan  and  would  enter 
into  the  church,  S.  Ambrose  came  against  him 
and  defended  him  the  entry,  and  said  to  him  that 
after  so  great  woodness  thou  oughtest  not  to  do  so 
great  presumption,  but  peradventure  thy  power 
euffereth  not  thee  to  acknowledge  thy  trespass.  It 
appertaineth  that  reason  surmount  power.  Thou 
art  emperor,  but  that  is  for  to  punish  the  evil 
people.  How  art  thou  so  hardy  to  enter  so  boldly 
into  the  house  of  God  whom  thou  hast  horribly 
angered  ? How  darest  thou  with  thy  feet  touch 
his  pavement  ? How  darest  thou  stretch  thy 
hands  which  be  all  bloody,  and  of  whom  the  blood 
of  innocents  run  and  drop  off.  By  what  presump- 
tion darest  thou  put  forth  thy  mouth  to  receive  the 
precious  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  of  which 
mouth  thou  hast  done  the  commandment  of  the 
devil  ? Go  hence ! go  hence ! and  put  not  sin 
upon  sin.  Take  the  bond  that  our  Lord  hath 
bounden  thee  with,  for  it  is  given  to  thee  in  the 
way  of  medicine.  When  the  emperor  heard  these 
words,  he  was  obedient  and  began  to  wail  and 
weep,  and  returned  intd  his  palace  and  abode  there 
long  weeping.  Then  Ruffin  the  master  of  his 
knights  demanded  wherefore  he  so  sorrowed  and 
wept,  and  he  answered  Ruffin,  thou  knowest  not 
my  sorrows,  for  I see  that  servants  and  poor 
beggars  may  enter  into  the  church  that  I may  not 


Digitized  by  Google 


120 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  enter,  for  Ambrose  hath  excommunicated  me. 

S*  And  he  saying  this,  at  every  word  he  sighed.  Then 
Ambrose  sa*^  Ruffin  to  him,  if  thou  wilt  I shall  make  him 
anon  to  assoil  thee.  He  answered : Thou  mayst 
not,  for  Ambrose  doubteth  not  the  force  ne  the 
power  of  the  emperor,  to  the  end  that  he  hold  firmly 
the  law  of  God.  And  when  Ruffin  said  more 
and  more  that  he  should  make  him  incline  to 
assoil  him,  then  he  sent  him  to  Ambrose,  and  the 
emperor  followed  soon  after  much  humbly. 
When  S.  Ambrose  saw  Ruffin  come,  he  said  to 
him:  Thou  hast  no  more  shame  than  an  hound 
for  to  do  such  occision,  and  now  comest  boldly  to 
me.  When  Ruffin  had  prayed  him  long  for  to 
assoil  the  emperor,  which  came  following  him, 
S.  Ambrose  said  to  him:  Certainly  I defend 
to  him  the  entry  into  the  church,  and  if  he 
will  be  a tyrant  I will  much  gladly  receive  the 
death.  Then  returned  Ruffin  to  the  emperor, 
and  recounted  to  him  how  he  had  done,  and 
the  emperor  said:  Certainly  I shall  go  to  him 
that  I may  receive  of  him  villainy  enough,  for  it 
is  well  right.  When  he  was  come  to  him  he 
demanded  of  him  absolution  much  devoutly.  S. 
Ambrose  demanded  of  him  what  penance  hast 
thou  done  for  so  great  wickedness  ? The  emperor 
alleged  to  him  that  David  had  sinned  and  after 
had  mercy.  S.  Ambrose  said : Thou  that  hast 
followed  him  that  sinned,  follow  also  him  repentant. 
Then  said  the  emperor : It  appertained  to  thee 
to  give  and  enjoin  penance,  and  I shall  do  it. 
Then  he  bade  him  do  open  penance  and  common 
tofore  all  the  people,  and  the  emperor  received  it 
gladly  and  refused  it  not.  When  the  emperor  was 
reconciled  to  the  church  he  stood  in  the  chancel. 
Then  said  to  him  S.  Ambrose:  What  seekest 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


121 


thou  here  ? He  answered : I am  here  for  to  The  Life 
receive  the  sacred  mysteries;  and  Ambrose  said:  S- 

This  place  appertained  to  no  man  but  to  priests.  P11*®® 
Go  out,  for  ye  ought  to  be  without  the  chancel 
and  abide  there  with  other.  Then  obeyed  the 
emperor  humbly  and  went  out.  And  after,  when 
the  emperor  came  to  Constantinople,  and  he  stood 
without  with  the  lay  people,  the  bishop  came  and 
said  to  him  that  he  should  come  into  the  chancel 
with  the  clerks,  he  answered  that  he  would  not, 
for  he  had  learned  of  S.  Ambrose  what  difference 
there  was  between  an  emperor  and  a priest.  I 
have  found  a man  of  truth,  my  master  Ambrose, 
and  such  a man  ought  to  be  a bishop. 


The  lives  of  the  Saints  Tyhurtius  and  Valerian  he  con- 
tained in  the  life  of  Cicely  > Virgin  and  Martyr . 


The  life  of  S.  Alphage  Bishop  and  Martyr . 

S.  Alphage  the  holy  bishop  and  martyr  was 
born  in  England  in  the  shire  of  Gloucester,  and 
he  came  of  a noble  kin,  and  was  his  father's  heir, 
but  he  forsook  all  for  God's  love’,  and  became  a 
monk  at  Deerhurst,  five  miles  from  Gloucester ; 
but  afterward  good  King  Edward  gave  that  house 
of  Deerhurst  to  the  house  of  S.  Denis  in  France. 
And  when  S.  Alphage  had  been  monk  there  long 
time,  living  a full  holy  life,  then  he  went  from 
thence  to  the  Abbey  of  Bath,  to  be  there  in  more 
contemplation  and  rest  of  soul.  And  he  builded 
there  that  fair  abbey  and  established  therein  black 
monks  and  endowed  it,  and  was  himself  therein 
the  first  abbot  and  founder.  And  he  led  there  a 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


122 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  full  holy  life,  and  much  well  he  guided  the  monks 
„ ? h*  holy  and  virtuous  living.  And  that  time  was 
pnage  g Dunstan,  bishop  of  Canterbury,  and  S.  Ethel- 
wold,  bishop  of  Winchester.  But  within  short 
time  after  S.  Ethelwold  died,  and  then  S.  Andrew 
appeared  to  S.  Dunstan  in  a night  and  bade  him 
arise  anon  and  make  Alphage,  abbot  of  Bath, 
bishop  of  Winchester,  and  so  it  was  done  with 
great  solemnity,  like  as  our  Lord  by  his  holy 
apostle  S.  Andrew  had  commanded,  and  he  was 
bishop  there  twenty-two  years  in  hill  holy  living. 
And  after  that  he  was  made  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, after  S.  Dunstan,  and  thereto  he  was  chosen 
by  the  pope,  and  by  all  the  clergy  of  England,  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  and  six  years, 
and  six  years  he  was  bishop  of  Canterbury.  And 
in  the  seventh  year  came  a wicked  tyrant  out  of 
Denmark  into  this  land  of  England,  whose  name 
was  Erdrithe,  with  a great  multitude  of  Danes. 
And  they  burnt  and  robbed  in  every  place  where 
they  came,  and  slew  many  lords  of  the  land,  and 
many  of  the  common  people.  And  that  time  was 
Ethelred  king  of  England,  and  S.  Edward  the 
martyr  was  his  brother,  and  S.  Edward  the  con- 
fessor his  son,  the  which  lieth  at  Westminster. 

And  in  this  'time  the  Danes  did  do  much  harm 
in  this  land.  The  chief  prince  of  them  hight 
Thurkill  and  his  brother  Erdrithe  was  leader  of 
the  host.  They  did  full  great  persecution,  for  there 
was  none  that  might  resist  ne  withstand  them,  for 
King  Ethelred  was  a meek  man  and  took  none 
heed  to  help  his  people.  And  Erdrithe,  with  the 
Danes  went  to  Canterbury,  and  there  he  did  much 
wickedness  to  the  people,  and  burnt  and  destroyed 
all  that  he  might  find,  but  at  the  last  he  was  slain 
by  men  of  Canterbury.  And  when  the  Prince 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


123 


Thurkill  wist  that  he  was  slain,  he  was  much  The  Life 
angry,  and  in  great  haste  he  came  to  Canterbury 
and  besieged  the  town  and  anon  he  gat  it,  and  burnt  I™” 
and  destroyed  all  that  he  might.  And  this  holy 
bishop  S.  Alphage  came  to  the  prince  of  the 
Danes,  and  prayed  him  to  take  his  body  and  spare 
the  poor  people  of  the  town,  but  for  all  that  he 
slew  monks,  priests  and  all  that  he  might  find. 

And  he  tithed  the  monks,  he  slew  nine  monks 
and  saved  the  tenth,  and  yet  he  thought  there  were 
over  many  alive,  and  began  to  tithe  them  again, 
and  then  S.  Alphage  reproved  them  for  their 
cursed  doings.  And  then  anon  they  took  S. 

Alphage,  the  holy  man,  and  bound  his  hands 
behind  him,  and  they  led  him  with  them  from 
thence  unto  the  town  of  Greenwich  beside  Lon- 
don, and  there  they  put  him  in  prison  half  a year 
and  more. 

And  the  Friday  in  the  Easter  week  the  devil 
appeared  to  this  holy  man  in  the  prison,  in  likeness 
of  an  angel,  and  said  unto  him  that  it  was  our 
Lord’s  will  that  he  should  go  out  of  prison  and 
follow  him.  And  this  holy  man  believed  him  and 
went  out,  and  followed  the  wicked  angel  by  night, 
and  he  brought  this  holy  man  into  a dark  valley, 
and  there  he  waded  over  waters  and  ditches,  mires 
and  hedges,  and  ever  this  holy  man  followed  him 
as  he  might  for  weariness,  till  at  the  last  he  had 
brought  him  into  a foul  mire  that  was  set  about 
with  great  waters,  and  there  the  devil  left  him,  and 
vanished  away.  And  then  this  holy  man  wist 
well  that  he  was  deceived  by  his  enemy  the  fiend, 
and  then  he  cried  God  mercy  and  prayed  him  of 
help.  And  then  our  Lord  sent  to  him  his  holy 
angel,  and  aided  him  out  of  the  mire  and  water, 
and  said  it  was  the  will  of  God  that  he  should 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


124 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Alphage 


return  again  to  prison  that  he  came  from,  for  to- 
morrow shah  thou  suffer  martyrdom  for  our  Lord’s 
sake.  And  as  he  went  again  towards  the  prison 
at  Greenwich,  early  by  the  morrow,  his  keepers 
that  had  sought  him  all  the  night  met  him,  and 
anon  they  cast  him  down  to  the  ground  and 
there  they  wounded  him  full  piteously.  And  then 
they  brought  him  again  to  prison,  and  they  made 
therein  a great  smouldering  of  smoke  for  to  disease 
him.  And  then  S.  Dunstan  appeared  to  him  and 
bade  him  be  of  good  comfort,  for  our  Lord  hath 
ordained  for  thee  a glorious  crown.  And  as  they 
spake  together  his  bonds  brake,  and  all  his  wounds 
were  made  whole  again  through  the  mercy  of  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  when  his  keepers  saw  this 
they  dreaded  full  sore.  And  anon  this  miracle 
was  known  to  the  people  and  they  went  then  fast 
to  see  him.  And  the  judges  doubted  the  great 
people  that  came  thither,  and  they  took  him  out  of 
prison  and  led  him  to  that  place  where  he  should 
be  martyred,  but  the  poor  people  made  great 
lamentation  for  him.  But  anon  the  wicked  tor- 
mentors stoned  him  to  death  like  as  the  Jews  did 
S.  Stephen.  And  when  he  was  almost  dead,  one 
there  was  that  was  his  godson,  which  with  an  axe 
smote  him  on  the  head  that  he  fell  to  the  ground, 
and  then  rendered  up  his  spirit  to  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ.  And  then  these  wicked  tyrants  threw  the 
holy  body  into  a deep  water  that  good  men  should 
not  find  it,  but  by  the  providence  of  our  Lord, 
within  short  time  after  he  was  found  of  the  true 
Christian  men,  and  they  reproved  greatly  these 
wicked  tyrants.  And  they  began  then  to  scorn 
the  holy  body  and  one  of  them  took  an  old  rotten 
stake  or  tree,  and  pight  it  in  the  earth  and  said : 
If  thiB  stake  bear  flowers  by  to-morrow  we  will 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


125 


repent  us  and  believe  that  he  is  an  holy  man,  or  The  Life 
else  we  will  never  believe  it.  And  on  the  morrow  of  S. 
they  found  the  stake  green  and  bare  leaves.  And  George 
when  they  saw  this  great  miracle  they  believed  in 
God,  and  kissed  the  feet  of  this  holy  Saint,  and 
repented  them  full  sore  of  their  wicked  deeds,  and 
cried  full  meekly  God  mercy,  and  this  holy  S. 

Alphage.  And  after,  he  was  brought  to  London 
with  great  worship  and  buried  in  the  church  of  S. 

Paul  with  great  reverence,  and  there  his  body  lay 
buried  many  years ; and  afterwards  it  was  taken 
up  and  translated  to  Canterbury,  and  his  bones 
there  laid  in  a worshipful  feretory  or  shrine,  where 
our  Lord  showed  daily  many  fair  miracles  for  his 
holy  martyr  S.  Alphage.  And  the  tormentors 
that  repented  them  not,  died  anon  after  in  great 
misery  in  divers  wises,  for  to  be  punished  as  it 
pleased  our  Lord.  Then  let  us  pray  to  this 
blessed  martyr  and  archbishop,  S.  Alphage,  that 
he  be  moyen  unto  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  that 
we  may  come  to  his  everlasting  bliss  in  heaven. 

Amen. 


Of  Sm  George , Martyr , and first  the  interpretation  of 
his  name . 

George  is  said  of  geos,  which  is  as  much  to  say 
as  earth,  and  orge  that  is  tilling.  So  George  is 
to  say  as  tilling  the  earth,  that  is  his  flesh.  And 
S.  Austin  saith,  in  libro  de  Trinitate  that,  good 
earth  is  in  the  height  of  the  mountains,  in  the 
temperance  of  the  valleys,  and  in  the  plain  of  the 
fields.  The  first  is  good  for  herbs  being  green, 
the  second  to  vines,  and  the  third  to  wheat  and 
corn.  Thus  the  blessed  George  was  high  in  de- 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


126 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  spising  low  things,  and  therefore  he  had  verdure 
of  S.  in  himself,  he  was  attemperate  by  discretion,  and 
®eor®e  therefore  he  had  wine  of  gladness,  and  within  he 
was  plane  of  humility,  and  thereby  put  he  forth 
wheat  of  good  works.  Or  George  may  be  said  of 
gerar,  that  is  holy,  and  of  gyon,  that  is  a wrestler, 
that  is  an  holy  wrestler,  for  he  wrestled  with  the 
dragon.  Or  George  is  said  of  gero,  that  is  a 
pilgrim,  and  gir,  that  is  detrenched  out,  and  ys,  that 
is  a councillor.  He  was  a pilgrim  in  the  sight  of 
the  world,  and  he  was  cut  and  detrenched  by  the 
crown  of  martyrdom,  and  he  was  a good  councillor 
in  preaching.  And  his  legend  is  numbered  among 
other  scriptures  apocryphal  in  the  council  of 
Nicene,  because  his  martyrdom  hath  no  certain 
relation.  For  in  the  calendar  of  Bede  it  is  said 
that  he  suffered  martyrdom  in  Persia  in  the  city 
of  Diaspolin,  and  in  other  places  it  is  read  that  he 
resteth  in  the  city  of  Diaspolin  which  tofbre  was 
called  Lidda,  which  is  by  the  city  of  Joppa 
or  Japh.  And  in  another  place  it  is  said  that  he 
suffered  death  under  Diocletian  and  Maximian, 
which  that  time  were  emperors.  And  in  another 
place  under  Diocletian  emperor  of  Persia,  being 
present  seventy  kings  of  his  empire.  And  it  is 
said  here  that  he  suffered  death  under  Dacian 
the  provost,  then  Diocletian  and  Maximian  being 
emperors. 

Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S,  George  Martyr • 

S.  George  was  a knight  and  born  in  Cappadocia. 
On  a time  he  came  in  to  the  province  of  Libya,  to 
a city  which  is  said  Silene.  And  by  this  city  was 
a stagne  or  a pond  like  a sea,  wherein  was  a 
dragon  which  envenomed  all  the  country.  Amd 


Digitized  by  vjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


127 


on  a time  the  people  were  assembled  for  to  slay  The  Life 
him,  and  when  they  saw  him  they  fled.  And  °f  S. 
when  he  came  nigh  the  city  he  venomed  the  'jeor&e 
people  with  his  breath,  and  therefore  the  people  of 
the  city  gave  to  him  every  day  two  sheep  for  to 
feed  him,  because  he  should  do  no  harm  to  the 
people,  and  when  the  sheep  failed  there  was  taken 
a man  and  a sheep.  Then  was  an  ordinance 
made  in  the  town  that  there  should  be  taken  the 
children  and  young  people  of  them  of  the  town  by 
lot,  and  every  each  one  as  it  fell,  were  he  gentle 
or  poor,  should  be  delivered  when  the  lot  fell  on 
him  or  her.  So  it  happed  that  many  of  them  of 
the  town  were  then  delivered,  insomuch  that  the 
lot  fell  upon  the  king’s  daughter,  whereof  the  king 
w«|8  sorry,  and  said  unto  the  people  : For  the  love 
of  the  gods  take  gold  and  silver  and  all  that  I 
have,  and  let  me  have  my  daughter.  They  said  : 

How  sir ! ye  have  made  and  ordained  the  law, 
and  our  children  be  now  dead,  and  ye  would  do 
the  contrary.  Your  daughter  shall  be  given,  or 
else  we  shall  burn  you  and  your  house. 

When  the  king  saw  he  might  no  more  do,  he 
began  to  weep,  and  said  to  his  daughter : Now 
shall  I never  see  thine  espousals.  Then  returned 
he  to  the  people  and  demanded  eight  days’  respite, 
and  they  granted  it  to  him.  And  when  the  eight 
days  were  passed  they  came  to  him  and  said : 

Thou  seest  that  the  city  perisheth  : Then  did  the 
king  do  array  his  daughter  like  as  she  should  be 
wedded,  and  embraced  her,  kissed  her  and  gave 
her  his  benediction,  and  after,  led  her  to  the  place 
where  the  dragon  was. 

When  she  was  there  S.  George  passed  by,  and 
when  he  saw  the  lady  he  demanded  the  lady  what 
she  made  there  and  she  said : Go  ye  your  way 

VOL.  111.  1 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


128 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  fair  young  man,  that  ye  perish  not  also.  Then 
of  S.  8ai(i  he ; Tell  to  me  what  have  ye  and  why  weep 
ueorge  ^ ancj  doubt  ye  of  nothing.  When  she  saw  that 
he  would  know,  she  said  to  him  how  she  was 
* delivered  to  the  dragon.  Then  said  S.  George: 
Fair  daughter,  doubt  ye  no  thing  hereof  for  I shall 
help  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesu  Christ.  She  said : 
For  God’s  sake,  good  knight,  go  your  way,  and 
abide  not  with  me,  for  ye  may  not  deliver  me. 
Thus  as  they  spake  together  the  dragon  appeared 
and  came  running  to  them,  and  S.  George  was 
upon  his  horse,  and  drew  out  his  sword  and 
garnished  him  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  rode 
hardily  against  the  dragon  which  came  towards 
him,  and  smote  him  with  his  spear  and  hurt  him 
sore  and  threw  him  to  the  ground.  And  after 
said  to  the  maid : Deliver  to  me  your  girdle,  and 
bind  it  about  the  neck  of  the  dragon  and  be  not 
afeard.  When  she  had  done  so  the  dragon  followed 
her  as  it  had  been  a meek  beast  and  debonair. 
Then  she  led  him  into  the  city,  and  the  people 
fled  by  mountains  and  valleys,  and  said : Alas ! 
alas ! we  shall  be  all  dead.  Then  S.  George  said  to 
them : Ne  doubt  ye  no  thing,  without  more,  believe 
ye  in  God,  Jesu  Christ,  and  do  ye  to  be  baptized 
and  I shall  slay  the  dragon.  Then  the  king  was 
baptized  and  all  his  people,  and  S.  George  slew 
the  dragon  and  smote  off  his  head,  and  com- 
manded that  he  should  be  thrown  in  the  fields, 
and  they  took  four  carts  with  oxen  that  drew  him 
out  of  the  city. 

Then  were  there  well  fifteen  thousand  men 
baptized,  without  women  and  children,  and  the 
king  did  do  make  a church  there  of  our  Lady  and 
of  S.  George,  in  the  which  yet  sourdeth  a fountain 
of  living  water,  which  healeth  sick  people  that 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


129 


drink  thereof.  After  this  the  king  offered  to  The  Life 
S.  George  as  much  money  as  there  might  be  S. 
numbered,  but  he  refused  all  and  commanded  that  KjeorSt 
it  should  be  given  to  poor  people  for  God’s  sake  ; 
and  enjoined  the  king  four  things,  that  is,  that  he 
should  have  charge  of  the  churches,  and  that  he 
should  honour  the  priests  and  hear  their  service 
diligently,  and  that  he  should  have  pity  on  the 
poor  people,  and  after,  kissed  the  king  and  departed. 

Now  it  happed  that  in  the  time  of  Diocletian 
and  Maximian,  which  were  emperors,  was  so  great 
persecution  of  Christian  men  that  within  a month 
were  martyred  well  twenty-two  thousand,  and 
therefore  they  had  so  great  dread  that  some  renied 
and  forsook  God  and  did  sacrifice  to  the  idols. 


When  S.  George  saw  this,  he  left  the  habit  of  a 
knight  and  sold  all  that  he  had,  and  gave  it  to  the 
poor,  and  took  the  habit  of  a Christian  man,  and 
went  into  the  middle  of  the  paynims  and  began  to 
cry : All  the  gods  of  the  paynims  and  gentiles  be 
devils,  my  God  made  the  heavens  and  is  very 
God.  Then  said  the  provost  to  him : Of  what 
presumption  cometh  this  to  thee,  that  thou  sayest 
that  our  gods  be  devils  ? And  say  to  us  what 
thou  art  and  what  is  thy  name.  He  answered 
anon  and  said : I am  named  George,  I am  a gentle- 
man, a knight  of  Cappadocia,  and  have  left  all  for 
to  serve  the  God  of  heaven.  Then  the  provost 
enforced  himself  to  draw  him  unto  his  faith  by 
fair  words,  and  when  he  might  not  bring  him 
thereto  he  did  do  raise  him  on  a gibbet ; and  so 
much  beat  him  with  great  staves  and  broches  of 
iron,  that  his  body  was  all  tobroken  in  pieces. 
And  after  he  did  do  take  brands  of  iron  and  join 
them  to  his  sides,  and  his  bowels  which  then 
appeared  he  did  do  frot  with  salt,  and  so  sent 


/ 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


130 

The  Life  him  into  prison,  but  our  Lord  appeared  to  him  the 
°*  S.  8ame  night  with  great  light  and  comforted  him 
ueorge  mucj1  8Weetly.  And  by  this  great  consolation  he 
took  to  him  so  good  heart  that  he  doubted  no 
torment  that  they  might  make  him  suffer.  Then, 
when  Dacian  the  provost  saw  that  he  might  not 
surmount  him,  he  called  his  enchanter  and  said  to 
him : I see  that  these  Christian  people  doubt  not 
our  torments.  The  enchanter  bound  himself,  upon 
his  head  to  be  smitten  off,  if  he  overcame  not  his 
crafts.  Then  he  did  take  strong  venom  and 
meddled  it  with  wine,  and  made  invocation  of  the 
names  of  his  false  gods,  and  gave  it  to  S.  George  ^ 
to  drink.  S.  George  took  it  and  made  the  sign  of' 
the  cross  on  it,  and  anon  drank  it  without  grieyag 
him  any  thing.  Then  the  enchanter  made  it  more 
stronger  than  it  was  tofore  of  venom,  and  gave  it 
him  to  drink,  and  it  grieved  him  nothing.  When 
the  enchanter  saw  that,  he  kneeled  down  at  the 
feet  of  S.  George  and  prayed  him  that  he  would 
make  him  Christian.  And  when  Dacian  knew 
that  he  was  become  Christian  he  made  to  smite  off 
his  head.  And  after,  on  the  morn,  he  made  S. 
George  to  be  set  between  two  wheels,  which  were 
full  of  swords,  sharp  and  cutting  on  both  sides,  but 
anon  the  wheels  were  broken  and  S.  George 
escaped  without  hurt.  And  then  commanded 
Dacian  that  they  should  put  him  in  a caldron  full 
of  molten  lead,  and  when  S.  George  entered 
therein,  by  the  virtue  of  our  Lord  it  seemed  that 
he  was  in  a bath  well  at  ease.  Then  Dacian 
seeing  this  began  to  assuage  his  ire,  and  to  flatter 
him  by  fair  words,  and  said  to  him : George,  the 
patience  of  our  gods  is  over  great  unto  thee  which 
hast  blasphemed  them,  and  done  to  them  great 
despite,  then  fair,  and  right  sweet  son,  I pray  thee 


,y  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


131 

that  thou  return  to  our  law  and  make  sacrifice  to  The  Life 
the  idols,  and  leave  thy  folly,  and  I shall  enhance  jf  S. 
thee  to  great  honour  and  worship.  Then  began  <jeor£e 
S.  George  to  smile,  and  said  to  him : Wherefore 
saidst  thou  not  to  me  thus  at  the  beginning  ? I / 
am  ready  to  do  as  thou  sayest.  Then  was  Dacian 
glad  and  made  to  cry  over  all  the  town  that  all 
the  people  should  assemble  for  to  see  George 
make  sacrifice  which  so  much  had  striven  there 
against.  Then  was  the  city  arrayed  and  feast 
kept  throughout  all  the  town,  and  all  came  to  the 
temple  for  to  see  him. 

When  S.  George  was  on  his  knees,  and  they 
supposed  that  he  would  have  worshipped  the  idols,  ; 
he  prayed  our  Lord  God  of  heaven  that  he  would 
destroy  the  temple  and  the  idol  in  the  honour  of  * 
his  name,  for  to  make  the  people  to  be  converted. 

And  anon  the  fire  descended  from  heaven  and 
burnt  the  temple,  and  the  idols,  and  their  priests, 
and  sith  the  earth  opened  and  swallowed  all  the 
cinders  and  ashes  that  were  left.  Then  Dacian 
made  him  to  be  brought  tofore  him,  and  said  to 
him : What  be  the  evil  deeds  that  thou  hast  done, 
and  also  great  untruth?  Then  said  to  him  S. 

George : Ah,  sir,  believe  it  not,  but  come  with 
me  and  see  how  I shall  sacrifice.  Then  said 
Dacian  to  him  : I see  well  thy  fraud  and  thy 
barat,  thou  wilt  make  the  earth  to  swallow  me, 
like  as  thou  hast  the  temple  and  my  gods.  Then 
said  S.  George : O caitiff,  tell  me  how  may  thy 
gods  help  thee  when  they  may  not  help  themselves  \ 

Then  was  Dacian  so  angry  that  he  said  to  his 
wife : I shall  die  for  anger  if  I may  not  surmount 
and  overcome  this  man.  Then  said  she  to  him  : 

Evil  and  cruel  tyrant ! ne  seest  thou  not  the  great 
virtue  of  the  Christian  people  ? I said  to  thee 


Digitized  by  Google 


132 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  well  that  thou  shouldst  not  do  to  them  any  harm, 
of  S.  for  their  God  fighteth  for  them,  and  know  thou 
eor$?c  weH  that  I will  become  Christian.  Then  was 
Dacian  much  abashed  and  said  to  her : Wilt  thou 
be  Christian  ? Then  he  took  her  by  the  hair,  and 
did  do  beat  her  cruelly.  Then  demanded  she 
of  S.  George:  What  may  I become  because  I 
am  not  christened  ? Then  answered  the  blessed 
George : Doubt  thee  nothing,  fair  daughter,  for 
thou  shalt  be  baptized  in  thy  blood.  Then  began 
she  to  worship  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  so  she 
died  and  went  to  heaven.  On  the  morn  Dacian 
gave  his  sentence  that  S.  George  should  be  drawn 
through  all  the  city,  and  after,  his  head  should  be 
smitten  off.  Then  made  he  his  prayer  to  our 
Lord  that  all  they  that  desired  any  boon  might 
get  it  of  our  Lord  God  in  his  name,  and  a voice 
came  from  heaven  which  said  that  it  which  he  had 
desired  was  granted  ; and  after  he  had  made  his 
orison  his  head  was  smitten  off,  about  the  year  of 
our  Lord  two  hundred  and  eighty-seven.  When 
Dacian  went  homeward  from  the  place  where  he 
was  beheaded  towards  his  palace,  fire  fell  down 
from  heaven  upon  him  and  burnt  him  and  all  his 
servants. 

Gregory  of  Tours  telleth  that  there  were  some 
that  bare  certain  relics  of  S.  George,  and  came 
into  a certain  oratory  in  a hospital,  and  on  the 
morning  when  they  should  depart  they  could  not 
move  the  door  till  they  had  left  there  part  of  their 
relics.  It  is  also  found  in  the  history  of  Antioch, 
that  when  the  Christian  men  went  over  sea  to 
conquer  Jerusalem,  that  one,  a right  fair  young 
man,  appeared  to  a priest  of  the  host  and  counselled 
him  that  he  should  bear  with  him  a little  of  the 
relics  of  S.  George,  for  he  was  conductor  of  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


133 


battle,  and  so  he  did  so  much  that  he  had  some.  The  Life 
And  when  it  was  so  that  they  had  assieged  of  S. 
Jerusalem  and  durst  not  mount  ne  go  up  on  the  George 
walls  for  the  quarrels  and  defence  of  the  Saracens, 
they  saw  appertly  S.  George  which  had  white 
arms  with  a red  cross,  that  went  up  tofore  them 
on  the  walls,  and  they  followed  him,  and  so 
was  Jerusalem  taken  by  his  help.  And  between 
Jerusalem  and  port  Jaffa,  by  a town  called  Ramys, 
is  a chapel  of  S.  George  which  is  now  desolate 
and  uncovered,  and  therein  dwell  Christian  Greeks. 

And  in  the  said  chapel  lieth  the  body  of  S. 

George,  but  not  the  head.  And  there  lie  his 
father  and  mother  and  his  uncle,  not  in  the  chapel 
but  under  the  wall  of  the  chapel ; and  the  keepers 
will  not  suffer  pilgrims  to  come  therein,  but  if 
they  pay  two  ducats,  and  therefore  come  but  few 
therein,  but  offer  without  the  chapel  at  an  altar. 

And  there  is  seven  years  and  seven  lents  of 
pardon ; and  the  body  of  S.  George  lieth  in  the 
middle  of  the  quire  or  choir  of  the  said  chapel, 
and  in  his  tomb  is  an  hole  that  a man  may  put  in 
his  hand.  And  when  a Saracen,  being  mad,  is 
brought  thither,  and  if  he  put  his  head  in  the  hole 
he  shall  anon  be  made  perfectly  whole,  and  have 
his  wit  again. 

This  blessed  and  holy  martyr  S.  George  is 
patron  of  this  realm  of  England  and  the  cry  of 
men  of  war.  In  the  worship  of  whom  is  founded 
the  noble  order  of  the  garter,  and  also  a noble 
college  in  the  castle  of  Windsor  by  kings  of 
England,  in  which  college  is  the  heart  of  S. 

George,  which  Sigismund,  the  emperor  of  Almayne, 
brought  and  gave  for  a great  and  a precious  relique 
to  King  Harry  the  fifth.  And  also  the  said  Sigis- 
mund was  a brother  of  the  said  garter,  and  also 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


134 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  there  is  a piece  of  his  head,  which  college  is  nobly 
endowed  to  the  honour  and  worship  of  Almighty 
S.  Mark  q0(j  ki8  ye88e(j  martyr  S.  George.  Then 
let  us  pray  unto  him  that  he  be  special  protector 
and  defender  of  this  realm. 


Here  followeth  of  S.  Marl  the  Evangelist , and  first 
the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Mark  is  as  much  to  say  as  high  to  command- 
ment, certain,  declined,  and  bitter.  He  was  high 
of  commandment  by  reason  of  perfection  in  his 
life,  for  he  kept  not  only  the  commandments 
common,  but  also  the  high  as  be  counsels.  He 
was  certain  in  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  like  as 
he  had  received  of  S.  Peter  his  master,  he  was 
declined  by  reason  of  perfect  and  great  humility, 
for  because  of  great  meekness  he  cut  off  his  thumb, 
to  the  end  that  he  should  not  be  chosen  to  be  a 
priest.  He  was  bitter  by  reason  of  right  sharp 
and  bitter  pain,  for  he  was  drawn  through  the 
city,  and  among  those  torments  he  gave  up  his 
spirit.  Or  Mark  is  said  of  a great  mallet  or 
beetle,  which  with  one  stroke  maketh  plain  iron 
and  engendereth  melody,  and  confirmeth  it.  For 
S.  Mark  by  his  only  doctrine  quencheth  the  un- 
steadfastness of  the  heretics,  he  engendered  the 
great  melody  of  the  praising  of  God,  and  confirmed 
the  church. 


Of  S . Marl  the  Evangelist • 

Mark  the  Evangelist  was  of  the  kindred  of  the 
Levites,  and  was  a priest.  And  when  he  was 
christened  he  was  godson  of  S.  Peter  the  apostle, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


i3S 


and  therefore  he  went  with  him  to  Rome.  When  The 
S.  Peter  preached  there  the  gospel,  the  good  people  Life  °f 
of  Rome  prayed  S.  Mark  that  he  would  put  the  “ar* 
gospel  in  writing,  like  as  S.  Peter  had  preached. 

Then  he  at  their  request  wrote  and  showed  it  to 
his  master  S.  Peter  to  examine ; and  when  S. 

Peter  had  examined  it,  and  saw  that  it  contained 
the  very  truth,  he  approved  it  and  commanded 
that  it  should  be  read  at  Rome.  And  then  S. 

Peter  seeing  S.  Mark  constant  in  the  faith,  lie  sent 
him  into  Aquilegia  for  to  preach  the  faith  of  Jesu 
Christ,  where  he  preached  the  word  of  God,  and 
did  many  miracles,  and  converted  innumerable 
multitudes  of  people  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  And 
wrote  also  to  them  the  gospel,  like  as  he  did  to 
them  of  Rome,  which  is  in  to  this  day  kept  in 
the  church  of  Aquilegia,  and  with  great  devotion 
kept. 

After  this  it  happed  that  S.  Mark  led  with  him 
to  Rome  a burgess  of  that  same  city  whom  he  had 
converted  to  the  faith,  named  Ermagoras,  brought 
him  to  S.  Peter,  and  prayed  him  that  he  would 
sacre  him  bishop  of  Aquilegia,  and  so  he  did. 

Then  this  Ermagoras,  when  he  was  bishop,  he 
governed  much  hoiily  the  church,  and  at  the  last 
the  paynims  martyred  him.  Then  S.  Peter  sent 
S.  Mark  into  Alexandria,  whereas  he  preached 
first  the  word  of  God,  and  as  soon  as  he  was 
entered  a great  multitude  of  people  assembled  for 
to  come  against  him.  There  was  he  of  so  great 
perfection  that  by  his  predication  and  by  his  good 
example,  the  people  mounted  in  so  holy  con- 
versation and  in  so  great  devotion  that,  at  his 
instance  they  led  their  life  like  monks. 

He  was  of  so  great  humility  that  he  did  cut 
off  his  thumb  because  he  would  be  no  priest,  for 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


136 

b The  he  judged  himself  not  worthy  thereto  5 but  the 
Life  of  ordinance  of  God  and  of  S.  Peter  came  against  his 
S.  Mark  wjjj>  for  3.  Peter  made  and  sacred  him  bishop  of 
Alexandria.  And  anon,  as  he  came  into  Alex- 
andria, his  shoes  were  broken  and  torn ; when  he 
saw  that  he  said:  Verily  I see  that  my  journey 
is  sped,  ne  the  devil  may  not  let  me  sith  that  God 
hath  assoiled  me  of  my  sins.  Then  went  S.  Mark 
to  a shoemaker  for  to  amend  his  shoes,  and  as  he 
would  work  he  pricked  and  sore  hurted  his  left 
hand  with  his  awl,  and  when  he  felt  him  hurt  he 
cried  on  high  : One  God ! when  S.  Mark  heard 
that  he  said  to  him  : Now  know  I well  that  God 
hath  made  my  journey  prosperous.  Then  he  took 
a little  clay  and  spittle  and  meddled  them  together 
and  laid  it  on  the  wound,  and  anon  he  was  whole. 
When  the  shoemaker  saw  this  miracle  he  brought 
him  into  his  house  and  demanded  him  what  he 
was,  and  from  whence  he  came.  Then  said  S. 
Mark  that  he  was  the  servant  of  Jesu  Christ,  and 
he  said : I would  fain  see  him.  Then  said  S. 
Mark : I shall  show  him  to  thee.  Then  he 
began  to  preach  to  him  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ, 
and  after  baptized  him  and  all  his  meiny.  When 
the  men  of  the  town  heard  say  that  there  was  a 
man  come  from  Galilee,  that  despised  and  defended 
the  sacrifices  of  idols,  they  began  await  how  they 
might  deliver  him  to  death.  When  S.  Mark 
espied  that,  he  made  his  shoemaker,  which  was 
named  Anian,  bishop  of  Alexandria,  and  he  him- 
self went  to  Pentapolin  whereas  he  was  two  years, 
and  after,  came  again  to  Alexandria  and  found  then 
there  the  town  full  of  Christian  men,  and  the 
bishops  of  the  idols  awaited  for  to  take  him. 

Now  it  happened  on  Easter  day,  when  S.  Mark 
sang  mass,  they  assembled  all  and  put  a cord  about 


,y  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


137 


his  neck,  and  after,  drew  him  throughout  the  city,  The 
and  said : Let  us  draw  the  bubale  to  the  place  of  Life  of 
bucale.  And  the  blood  ran  upon  the  stones,  and  Mark 
his  flesh  was  torn  piecemeal  that  it  lay  upon  the 
pavement  all  bebled.  After  this  they  put  him  in 
prison,  where  an  angel  came  and  comforted  him, 
and  after  came  our  Lord  for  to  visit  and  comfort 
him,  saying : Pax  tibi  Marce  evangelista  meus. 

Peace  be  to  thee  Mark,  mine  Evangelist ! be  not 
in  doubt,  for  I am  with  thee  and  shall  deliver  thee. 

And  on  the  morn  they  put  the  cord  about  his 
neck  and  drew  him  like  as  they  had  done  tofore, 
and  cried : Draw  the  bubale,  and  when  they  had 
drawn  he  thanked  God  and  said  : Into  thy  hands 
Lord,  I commend  my  spirit,  and  he  thus  saying 
died.  Then  the  paynims  would  have  burnt  his 
body,  but  the  air  began  suddenly  to  change  and 
to  hail,  lighten  and  thunder,  in  such  wise  that 
every  man  enforced  him  to  flee,  and  left  there  the 
holy  body  alone.  Then  came  the  Christian  men 
and  bare  it  away,  and  buried  it  in  the  church, 
with  great  joy,  honour,  and  reverence.  This  was 
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  fifty-seven,  in  the  time 
that  Nero  was  emperor. 

And  it  happed  in  the  year  of  grace  four  hundred 
and  sixty-six  in  the  time  of  Leo  the  emperor,  that 
the  Venetians  translated  the  body  of  S.  Mark  from 
Alexandria  to  Venice  in  this  manner.  There 
were  two  merchants  of  Venice  did  so  much,  what 
by  prayer  and  by  their  gifts,  to  two  priests  that 
kept  the  body  of  S.  Mark,  that  they  suffered  it 
to  be  borne  secretly  and  privily  unto  their  ship. 

And  as  they  took  it  out  of  the  tomb,  there  was 
so  sweet  an  odour  throughout  all  the  city  of 
Alexandria  that  all  the  people  marvelled,  ne  knew 
not  from  whence  it  came.  Then  the  merchants 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Mark 


138  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

brought  it  to  the  ship,  and  after,  hasted  the 
mariners  and  let  the  other  ships  have  knowledge 
thereof.  Then  there  was  one  man  in  another 
ship  that  japed,  and  said : Ween  ye  to  carry  away 
the  body  of  S.  Mark  ? Nay,  ye  lead  with  you  an 
Egyptian.  Then  anon,  after  this  word,  the  ship 
wherein  the  holy  body  was,  turned  lightly  after 
him,  and  so  rudely  boarded  the  ship  of  him  that 
had  said  that  word,  that  he  brake  one  of  the  sides 
of  the  ship,  and  would  never  leave  it  in  peace  till 
they  had  confessed  that  the  body  of  S.  Mark  was 
in  die  ship,  that  done,  she  held  her  still. 

Thus  as  they  sailed  fast  they  took  none  heed, 
and  the  air  began  to  wax  dark  and  thick,  that 
they  wist  not  where  they  were.  Then  appeared 
S.  Mark  unto  a monk,  to  whom  the  body  of 
S.  Mark  was  delivered  to  keep,  and  bade  him 
anon  to  strike  their  sails  for  they  were  nigh  land, 
and  he  did  so,  and  anon  they  found  land  in  an  isle. 
And  by  all  the  rivages  whereas  they  passed,  it  was 
said  to  them  that  they  were  well  happy  that  they 
led  so  noble  a treasure  as  the  body  of  S.  Mark, 
and  prayed  them  that  they  would  let  them  worship 
it.  Yet  there  was  a mariner  that  might  not  believe 
that  it  was  the  body  of  S.  Mark,  but  the  devil 
entered  into  him,  and  tormented  him  so  long  that 
he  could  not  be  delivered  till  he  was  brought  to 
the  holy  body ; and  as  soon  as  he  confessed  that 
it  was  the  body  of  S.  Mark,  he  was  delivered  of 
the  wicked  spirit,  and  ever  after  he  had  great 
devotion  to  S.  Mark. 

It  happed  after,  that  the  body  of  S.  Mark  was 
closed  in  a pillar  of  marble,  and  right  few  people 
knew  thereof  because  it  should  be  secretly  kept. 
Then  it  happed  that  they  that  knew  thereof  died, 
and  there  was  none  that  knew  where  this  great 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


139 


treasure  might  be,  wherefore  the  clerks  and  the  The 
lay  people  were  greatly  discomforted  and  wept  for 
sorrow,  and  doubted  much  that  it  had  been  stolen  ** 
away.  Then  made  they  solemn  processions  and 
litanies,  and  the  people  began  to  fast  and  be  in 
prayers,  and  all  suddenly  the  stones  opened  and 
showed  to  all  the  people  the  place  and  stead  where 
the  holy  body  rested.  Then  rendered  they 
thankings  to  God  of  this,  that  he  had  relieved 
them  of  their  sorrow  and  anguish,  and  ordained 
that  on  that  day  they  shall  hold  feast  alway  for 
this  devout  revelation. 

A young  man  on  a time  had  a cancer  in  his 
breast,  and  worms  ate  it  which  were  come  of 
rotting,  and  as  he  was  thus  tormented  he  prayed 
with  good  heart  to  S.  Mark,  and  required  him 
of  help  and  aid,  and  after*  he  slept.  And  that 
same  time  appeared  to  him  S.  Mark  in  form  of  a 
pilgrim,  tucked  and  made  ready  for  to  go  hastily 
over  sea;  and  when  he  demanded  him  what  he 
was,  he  answered  that  he  was  S.  Mark,  which 
went  hastily  for  to  succour  a ship  which  is 
in  peril ; then  he  stretched  and  laid  his  hand  on 
him,  and  anon  as  he  awoke  he  found  himself  all 
whole.  Anon  after,  this  ship  came  unto  the  port 
of  Venice,  and  the  mariners  told  the  peril  where 
they  had  been  in,  and  how  S.  Mark  had  holpen 
them,  then  for  that  one  miracle  and  for  that 
other  the  people  rendered  thankings  to  our  Lord. 

The  merchants  of  Venice  went  on  a time  by  the 
sea  in  a ship  of  Saracens  towards  Alexandria ; and 
when  they  saw  them  in  peril,  they  hewed  the 
cords  of  the  ship,  and  anon  the  ship  began  to  break 
by  the  force  of  the  sea.  And  all  the  Saracens 
that  were  therein  fell  in  the  sea,  and  died  that  one 
after  that  other.  Then  one  of  the  Saracens  made 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  his  avow  to  S.  Mark  and  promised  him  that  if  he 
S *Mark  c*e^verec*  k*m  ^rom  this  peril  he  would  be  baptized. 

Anon  a man  all  shining  appeared  to  him,  which 
took  him  out  of  the  water  and  remitted  him  again 
into  the  ship,  and  anon  the  tempest  ceased.  When 
he  was  come  into  Alexandria  he  remembered  no 
thing  S.  Mark,  which  had  delivered  him  from 
peril,  he  went  not  to  visit  him,  ne  he  did  him  not 
do  be  baptized.  Then  appeared  to  him  S.  Mark, 
and  said  to  him  that  he  remembered  evil  the 
bounty  that  he  did  to  him  when  he  delivered  him 
from  the  peril  of  the  sea,  and  anon  the  Saracen  came 
again  to  his  conscience,  and  he  went  to  Venice,  and 
was  there  baptized  and  named  Mark,  and  believed 
perfectly  in  God,  and  ended  his  life  in  good 
works. 

There  was  a man  gone  up  in  the  steeple  of  S. 
Mark  at  Venice ; and  as  he  intended  for  to  do  a 
work,  he  was  troubled  in  such  wise  that  he  fell, 
and  was  like  to  have  been  all  to-broken  in  his 
members,  nevertheless  in  his  falling  he  cried : S. 
Mark!  and  anon  he  rested  upon  a branch  that 
sprang  out,  whereof  he  took  none  heed,  and  after, 
one  raught  and  let  him  down  a cord,  by  which  he 
avaled  down  and  was  saved. 

There  was  a gentleman  of  Provence  which  had 
a servant  that  would  fain  go  on  pilgrimage  to  S. 
Mark,  but  he  could  get  no  licence  of  his  lord.  At 
last  he  doubted  not  to  anger  his  lord,  but  went 
thither  much  devoutly.  And  when  his  lord  knew 
it  he  bare  it  much  grievously,  and  as  soon  as  he 
was  come  again  his  lord  commanded  that  his  eyes 
should  be  put  out;  and  the  other  servants  that  were 
ready  to  do  the  lord’s  will  made  ready  sharp  brochets 
of  iron,  and  enforced  them  with  all  their  power  and 
might  not  do  it.  Then  commanded  the  lord  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  141 

hew  off  his  thighs  with  axes,  but  anon  the  iron  was  The 
as  soft  as  molten  lead.  Then  commanded  he  to  Life  of 
break  his  teeth  with  iron  hammers,  but  the  iron 
thereof  was  so  soft  that  they  could  do  him  no 
harm.  Then  when  the  lord  saw  the  virtue  of 
God  so  openly  by  the  miracles  of  S.  Mark,  he 
demanded  pardon  and  went  to  Venice,  to  S.  Mark, 
with  his  servant. 

There  was  a knight  on  a time  so  hurt  in  battle 
that  his  hand  hung  on  the  arm  in  such  wise  that 
his  friends  and  surgeons  counselled  him  to  cut  it 
off,  but  he,  that  was  accustomed  to  be  whole,  was 
ashamed  to  be  maimed,  and  made  it  to  be  bound  in 
his  place,  and  after  he  called  much  devoutly  to  S. 

Mark,  and  anon  his  hand  was  as  whole  as  it  had 
been  tofore,  and  in  the  witness  of  this  miracle  a 
sign  of  the  cutting  abode  still. 

Another  time  there  was  a knight  armed  which 
ran  upon  a bridge,  and  his  horse  and  he  fell  in  a 
deep  water,  and  when  he  saw  he  might  not  escape 
he  cried  on  S.  Mark,  and  anon  he  raught  him  a 
spear  by  which  he  was  saved,  and  for  this  cause  he 
came  anon  in  pilgrimage  to  Venice  and  told  this 
miracle. 

' There  was  a man  taken,  by  envy  of  them  that 
hated  him,  and  was  put  in  prison,  and  when  he  had 
been  there  forty  days,  and  was  much  grieved,  he 
cried  on  S.  Mark.  And  when  S.  Mark  had 
appeared  thrice  he  supposed  that  it  had  been  a 
fantasy.  At  the  last  he  felt  his  irons  broken,  as 
it  had  been  a rotten  thread,  and  passed  by  the 
keepers  of  the  prison  openly  by  day,  he  seeing 
them  all,  but  none  of  them  saw  him,  and  after, 
came  to  the  church  of  S.  Mark  and  thanked  God 
devoutly. 

It  happed  in  Apulia  was  great  famine,  and  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


142 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  land  was  barren  that  nothing  might  grow  thereon. 
Then  was  it  showed  by  revelation  to  a holy  man 
. Marie  tkat  jt  wag  because  that  they  hallowed  not  the  feast 
of  S.  Mark ; and  when  they  knew  this,  anon  they 
hallowed  the  feast  of  S.  Mark,  and  anon  began  to 
grow  great  plenty  of  goods  throughout  all  the 
country. 

It  happed  at  Papia,  in  the  convent  of  the  friars 
preachers,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand 
two  hundred  and  forty-one,  that  a friar,  a much 
religious  man,  was  sick  unto  the  death,  named 
Julianus,  which  sent  for  his  prior  for  to  demand  him 
in  what  state  he  was  in,  and  he  told  him  that  he  was 
in  peril  of  death,  and  that  it  approached  fast,  and 
anon  his  face  was  all  bright  and  joyful,  and  with 
gladness  he  began  to  say : F air  brethren,  my  soul 
shall  depart  anon,  make  room  and  place,  for  my 
soul  joyeth  in  my  body  for  the  good  tidings  that  I 
have  heard.  And  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven 
and  said : Lord  God,  take  away  my  soul  out  of 
this  prison  ; and  after  he  said : Alas ! who  shall 
deliver  me  from  this  corrupt  and  mortal  body? 
Among  these  words  he  fell  in  a light  sleep,  and 
saw  S.  Mark  come  to  him  and  standing  by  his 
bedside,  and  he  heard  a voice  saying  to  him : O 
Mark,  what  makest  thou  here?  He  answered 
that  he  was  come  to  visit  this  friar  because  he 
should  die.  Then  he  demanded  him  wherefore 
he  came  more  than  another  saint;  he  answered 
because  he  had  a special  devotion  to  me,  and 
because  he  hath  oft  devoutly  visited  my  church, 
and  therefore  am  I come  to  visit  him  in  the  hour 
of  his  death.  Then  entered  into  that  place  great 
plenty  of  people  all  white,  to  whom  S.  Mark 
demanded  wherefore  they  were  come.  And  they 
said  and  answered  that  they  were  come  for  to 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


*43 


present  the  soul  of  this  brother  tofore  God.  And  The  Life 
when  the  friar  was  waked  he  sent  for  the  prior  °f  S. 
and  told  to  him  advisedly  all  this  vision,  and  after,  ^arce^ 
anon,  in  the  presence  of  the  prior,  he  died  with 
great  joy.  And  all  this  the  prior  recounted  to 
him  that  wrote  this  book  named  Legenda  aurea. 


Here  follow eth  of  S . Marcelin  the  Pope . 

S.  Marcelin  was  pope  of  Rome  by  the  space  of 
nine  years  and  four  months.  In  his  time  reigned 
Diocletian  and  Maximian,  emperors  of  Rome. 

The  which  commanded  that  he  should  be  taken 
and  brought  into  the  temple  for  to  do  sacrifice  to 
the  idols ; and  when  he  would  not  assent,  the 
ministers  of  the  emperors  menaced  him  that  they 
would  make  him  die  by  diverse  torments.  And 
when  he  heard  that,  he  had  so  great  dread  that  he 
put  in  their  sacrifice  two  grains  of  incense  only, 
whereof  the  paynims  had  great  joy,  and  the  Chris- 
tian men  had  right  great  sorrow,  and  reprehended  v- V 
him  greatly  of  that  he  had^tish~-a-thu^^ 
against  the  cLiLuafi’’  faith,  and  anon  he  repented 
him  and  put  himself  to  the  judgment  of  the 
bishops.  But  the  bishops  answered  : God  forbid 
that  it  never  fall  that  the  pope  of  the  Christian 
people,  which  is  sovereign,  be  judged  of  any  man, 
but  be  he  judged  of  himself,  and  anon  he  deposed 
himself.  And  after,  the  Christian  men  chose  him 
again  to  be  pope  as  he  was  tofore.  And  when 
this  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the  emperors,  then 
they  did  do  take  him  and,  because  that  he  would 
in  no  wise  do  sacrifice  to  the  idols,  they  made  to 
smite  off  his  head.  And  then  the  persecution  and 
woodness  was  so  great  of  the  paynims  against  the 

K 


VOL.  in. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


144 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Christian  people,  that  within  a month  after  were 
kife  °f  pUt  to  death  for  the  name  of  Jesu  Christ  and  for  to 
1 sustain  the  Christian  faith,  well  a seventeen  thousand 
Christian  people.  Marcelin,  in  the  hour  that  he 
should  be  beheaded,  said  tofore  all  the  people  that 
he  was  not  worthy  to  be  buried  among  Christian 
people,  and  therefore  he  commanded  upon  pain  of 
cursing  that  none  should  bury  his  body.  And  so 
the  body  of  him  abode  above  the  earth  thirty-five 
days  without  burying. 

After,  S.  Peter  the  apostle  appeared  to  Marcel, 
which  was  pope  after  Marcelin,  and  said  to  him 
in  this  manner : Marcel,  fair  father,  why  buriest 
thou  not  me  ? And  he  answered  : Sir,  be  ye  not 
long  sith  buried  ? And  S.  Peter  said : I hold  me 
not  buried  as  long  as  I see  Marcelin  not  buried, 
and  the  pope  answered  : How,  sir ! know  ye  not 
how  he  accursed  all  them  that  should  bury  him  ? 
And  S.  Peter  said:  Is  it  not  written  that  he 
that  meeketh  himself  shall  be  enhanced?  This 
shouldest  thou  have  thought ; go  then  and  bury 
him  at  my  feet.  And  anon  the  pope  did  his 
afitbhgried  the  body  ot  S.  Marcelin 
hastily,  which  was  martyreJ^fie^ear  of  our*  Lord 
two  hundred  and  eighty.  Then  pray  we  to  him 
that  he  pray  for  us. 


Of  S.  Vital,  Martyr , and  first  of  the  inter - 
pretation  of  his  name. 

Vital  is  as  much  to  say  as  such  one  living,  for 
he  lived  without  forth  like  as  he  was  in  his  heart 
within.  Or  Vital  is  as  much  to  say  as  life.  Or 
Vital  is  to  say  flying  with  wings,  or  flying 
himself  with  wings  of  virtues.  He  was  as  one 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


145 


of  the  beasts  that  Ezechiel  saw,  having  in  himself  The 
four  wings ; the  wing  of  hope  by  which  he  flew 
into  heaven,  the  wing  of  love  by  which  he  flew  to  1 
God,  the  wing  of  dread  by  which  he  flew  to  hell, 
and  the  wing  of  knowledge  by  which  he  flew  to 
himself.  And  it  is  supposed  that  his  passion  is 
found  in  the  book  of  Gervase  and  Prothase. 

Of  S.  Vital. 

S.  Vital  was  a knight  and  a consul,  and  of 
Valeria  his  wife  he  gat  S.  Gervase  and  S. 
Prothase.  He  went  to  Ravenna  with  Paulin 
that  was  judge  of  the  country,  and  when  he  came 
thither  he  saw  that  this  Paulin  made  a physician 
named  Ursian  to  suffer  many  torments  because  he 
would  not  reny  his  faith,  and  at  the  last  when  they 
would  have  beheaded  him  he  was  so  afraid  that  he 
would  have  renied  God.  Then  said  S.  Vital  to 
him : Ha ! Ursian,  do  not  so,  thou  wert  wont  to 
heal  other  and  now  wilt  deliver  thyself  to  perdur- 
able death.  Thou  wert  come  to  the  victory,  now 
thou  art  in  peril  to  lose  thy  crown  which  was 
ready  for  thee.  When  this  physician  had  heard 
these  words,  he  was  all  recomforted,  and  repented 
of  his  evil  purpose,  and  suffered  gladly  martyrdom. 

And  S.  Vital  did  do  bury  him  much  honorably, 
ne  never  after  would  S.  Vital  not  go  in  the  company 
of  the  judge  Paulin.  Then  he  had  so  great  in- 
dignation, of  that  he  had  defended  Ursian  to  make 
sacrifice,  and  of  this  that  he  deigned  not  to  come 
to  him,  and  because  he  showed  him  a Christian 
man  he  did  him  to  be  hanged  by  the  arms  on  a 
gibbet.  Then  said  to  him  Vital,  thou  art  over- 
much a fool  if  thou  ween  to  deceive  me  which 
have  always  delivered  the  other.  Then  said 


Digitized  by 


Google 


146 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Paulin : Bring  him  for  to  do  sacrifice,  and  if  he 
sL£etof  do  it  not,  make  a deep  pit  unto  the  water  and  put 
of  Milan  head  thereunder.  And  so  they  did,  and  there 
buried  him  quick,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  fifty- 
seven.  And  the  priest  of  the  idols  that  had  given 
this  counsel  was  anon  taken  of  the  devil,  and  cried 
seven  days  continually  and  said : S.  Vital  thou 
burnest  me,  and  the  seventh  day  the  devil  threw 
him  in  the  river  and  there  died  shamefully.  And 
the  wife  of  S.  Vital,  when  she  came  to  Milan  she 
found  there  of  her  people  sacrificing  the  idols,  which 
prayed  her  to  eat  with  them  of  their  sacrifices,  to 
whom  she  answered : I am  a Christian  woman,  and 
it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  eat  of  your  sacrifices. 
Then  they,  hearing  that,  beat  her  so  long  and  so 
sore  that  they  left  her  for  dead.  And  her  men 
that  were  with  her  brought  her  to  Milan  half 
living,  and  there  the  third  day  she  died  holily. 
And  the  body  of  S.  Vital  lieth  now  at  Cologne 
in  the  church  of  our  Lady. 


Here  follo'weth  the  Life  of  S . Peter  of  Mil  an , and 
frst  the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Peter  is  as  much  to  say  as  knowing  or  unhosing, 
or  Peter  is  said  of  petros,  that  is  constant  and 
firm,  and  by  that  be  understood  three  privileges 
that  were  in  S.  Peter;  he  was  a much  noble 
preacher,  and  therefore  he  is  said  knowing,  for 
he  had  perfect  knowledge  of  scripture,  and  knew 
in  his  predication  what  was  behoveful  to  ever  each 
person.  Secondly,  he  was  pure  and  a virgin,  and 
therefore  he  was  said  unhosing,  for  he  unhosed 
and  did  off  his  will  from  his  feet,  and  de- 
spoiled all  mortal  love,  insomuch  that  he  was  a 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


147 


virgin,  and  not  only  of  body  but  also  of  mind.  The 
Thirdly,  he  was  a martyr  glorious  of  our  Lord,  Life  of 
and  therein  he  was  constant  and  firm,  to  the  end  ^ 
that  he  should  suffer  steadfastly  martyrdom  for  the  ° 
defence  of  the  faith. 

Of  S.  Peter  of  Milan . 

S.  Peter  the  new  martyr,  of  the  order  of  the 
friars  preachers,  was  born  in  the  city  of  Verona 
in  Lombardy.  His  father  and  mother  were  of 
the  sect  of  the  Arians.  Then  he  descended  of 
these  people  like  as  the  rose  that  cometh  of  the 
thorn,  and  as  the  light  that  cometh  of  the  smoke. 

At  the  age  of  seven  years,  when  he  learned  at  the 
school  his  credo,  one,  his  eme,  which  was  a heretic, 
demanded  of  him  his  lesson,  and  the  child  said  to 
him : Credo,  till  to  creatorem  coeli  et  terrae ; his 
uncle  said  to  him  that  he  should  no  more  say  so, 
for  God  hath  not  made  temporal  things,  the  child 
affirmed  that  he  ought  to  say  none  otherwise,  but 
so  as  he  had  learned,  and  that  other  began  to  show 
him  by  authority  his  purpose ; but  the  child,  which 
was  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  answered  so  well  and 
wisely  that  his  uncle  departed  all  confused,  and  all 
achauffed,  said  to  the  father  that  he  should  take 
away  his  son  from  school,  for  he  doubted  when 
he  shall  be  great  that  he  should  turn  against  their 
law  and  faith,  and  that  he  should  confound  them. 

And  so  it  happed,  and  so  he  prophesied  like  as 
Caiaphas  did,  but  God,  against  whom  none  may 
do,  would  not  suffer  it  for  the  great  profit  that 
he  attended  of  him.  Then  after,  when  he  came 
to  more  age,  he  saw  that  it  was  no  sure  thing  to 
dwell  with  the  scorpions.  He  had  in  despite 
father  and  mother,  and  left  the  world  whiles  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


148 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  was  a clear  and  a pure  virgin.  He  entered  into 
Life  of  the  order  of  the  friars  preachers  there,  whereas 
S*  he  lived  much  holily  the  space  of  thirty  years  or 
0 1 an  thereabout,  full  of  all  virtues  and  especial  in  de- 

fending the  faith,  for  love  of  which  he  burnt.  He 
did  much  abstinence  for  to  bring  his  flesh  low, 
he  fasted,  he  entended  to  wake  by  night  in  study- 
ing and  in  prayer  when  he  should  have  slept  and 
rested,  and  by  day  he  entended  to  the  profit  of 
the  souls,  in  preaching,  in  confessing,  and  in 
counselling,  in  disputing  against  the  heretics  and 
Arians,  and  in  that  he  had  a special  grace  of  Jesu 
Christ,  for  he  was  right  sore  founded  in  humility. 
He  was  marvellously  piteous  and  debonair,  full  of 
compassion,  of  great  patience,  of  great  charity,  and 
of  steadfastness.  So  ripe  and  so  well  ordained  in 
fair  manner  that  every  man  might  behold  as  in  a 
mirror,  in  his  continence  and  in  his  conversation. 
He  was  wise  and  discreet,  and  so  emprinted  in 
his  heart  that  all  his  words  were  firm  and  stable. 
Then  he  prayed  many  times  to  our  Lord  that  he 
would  not  let  him  die  but  by  sufferance  of  martyr- 
dom for  him  and  for  his  faith.  And  thus  as  he 
prayed  God  accomplished  in  the  end. 

He  did  many  miracles  in  his  life,  for  in  the 
city  of  Milan,  on  a time  when  he  examined  a 
bishop  of  the  Arians  that  the  Christian  men  had 
taken,  and  many  bishops,  religious,  and  great  plenty 
of  other  people  of  the  city  were  there  assembled, 
and  was  then  right  hot,  this  Arian  said  to  S.  Peter 
tofore  them  all : O thou  Peter  perverse,  if  thou 
art  so  holy  as  this  people  holdeth  thee  for,  where- 
fore sufferest  thou  this  foolish  people  to  die  for 
heat,  and  prayest  not  God  that  he  would  shadow 
them.  Then  S.  Peter  answered  and  said:  If 
thou  wilt  promise  that  thou  shalt  hold  the  very  faith 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


149 


and  thou  wilt  leave  thine  heresy,  I shall  pray  there-  The 
for  to  our  Lord.  Then  all  they  that  were  on  Jjife  of 
the  party  of  the  Arians  cried  that  he  should  jjf 
promise  him,  for  they  supposed  that  he  should 
not  get  it  specially,  because  the  air  was  so  clear 
and  no  cloud  was  seen,  and  the  Christian  men 
doubted  that  their  faith  might  thereby  come  to 
confusion,  but  the  bishop,  the  heretic,  would  not 
bind  him  thereto.  S.  Peter  had  good  faith  and 
trust  in  God,  and  made  his  prayer  openly  that 
he  would  convey  over  them  a cloud,  and  he  made 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  anon  the  cloud  came 
and  overspread  them  like  a pavilion  that  there 
were  assembled,  and  abode  as  long  as  the  sermon 
endured,  and  it  stretched  no  further  but  there. 

There  was  a lame  man  which  had  been  so  lame 
five  years  and  might  not  go,  but  was  drawn  in  a 
wheelbarrow,  and  brought  to  S.  Peter  at  Milan, 
and  as  S.  Peter  had  blessed  him  with  the  sign  of 
the  cross,  anon  he  was  whole  and  arose.  Yet 
other  miracles  God  showed  for  him  by  his  life. 

It  happed  that  the  son  of  a gentleman  had  such 
a horrible  disease  in  his  throat  that  he  might 
neither  speak  ne  draw  his  breath,  but  S.  Peter 
made  on  him  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  laid  his 
cope  on  the  place  where  the  sore  was,  and  anon 
he  was  all  whole.  The  same  gentleman  had 
afterwards  a grievous  malady  and  supposed  to  have 
died,  and  made  bring  to  him  the  said  cope,  which 
with  great  devotion  laid  it  on  his  breast,  and  anon 
he  cast  out  a worm  with  two  heads  which  was 
rough,  and  after  he  was  brought  in  good  health 
and  anon  all  whole.  It  happed  that  a young  man 
was  dumb  and  might  not  speak  a word,  wherefore 
he  came  to  S.  Peter,  and  he  put  his  finger  in  his 
mouth  and  his  speech  came  to  him  again.  Now 


Digitized  by  Google 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Peter 
of  Milan 


150  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

it  happed  that  time  that  an  heresy  began  much  in 
Lombardy,  and  that  there  were  much  people  that 
were  fallen  in  this  error,  and  the  pope  sent  divers 
inquisitors  thither  of  the  order  of  the  friars 
preachers,  and  because  that  at  Milan  there  were 
many  in  number  of  great  power  and  engine,  he 
sent  thither  S.  Peter  as  a man  wise,  constant,  and 
religious,  which  doubted  nothing.  And  by  his 
virtue  he  reproved  them,  and  by  his  wit  he  under- 
stood their  malice,  and  when  he  had  enterprised 
the  office  of  Inquisition,  then  began  he,  as  a lion, 
to  seek  the  heretics  over  all,  and  left  them  not  in 
peace,  but  in  all  places,  times,  and  all  the  manners 
that  he  might,  he  overcame  and  confounded  them. 
When  the  heretics  saw  that  they  might  not  with- 
stand the  Holy  Ghost  that  spake  in  him,  they 
began  to  treat  how  they  might  bring  him  to  death. 
Then  it  happed  on  a time,  as  he  went  from  Cumea 
to  Milan  for  to  seek  the  heretics,  he  said  openly 
in  a predication  that  the  money  was  delivered  for 
to  slay  him.  And  when  he  approached  nigh  the 
city  a man  of  the  heretics,  which  was  hired  thereto, 
ran  upon  him  and  smote  him  with  his  falchion  on 
the  head,  and  gave  and  made  to  him  many  cruel 
wounds,  and  he  that  murmured  not  ne  grudged 
not,  suffered  patiently  the  cruelty  of  the  tyrants, 
and  abandoned  or  gave  himself  over  to  suffer  the 
martyrdom,  and  said  his  credo,  and  in  manus  tuas, 
commending  his  spirit  unto  the  hands  of  our  Lord. 
And  so  the  tyrant  left  him  in  the  place  for  dead, 
and  thus  told  the  tyrant  that  slew  him,  and  friar 
Dominic  which  was  his  fellow  was  slain  with  him. 
And  after,  when  the  tyrant  saw  that  he  removed 
yet  his  lips,  the  cursed  and  cruel  tyrant  came 
again  and  smote  him  with  his  knife  to  the  heart, 
and  anon  his  spirit  mounted  in  to  heaven.  Then 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


151 


was  it  well  known  that  he  was  a very  prophet,  for  The 
the  prophecy  of  his  death  that  he  had  pronounced  Life  of 
was  accomplished.  After,  he  had  the  crown  of  ^ 
virginity,  for  as  his  confessors  witness  that  in  all  ° 
his  life  he  had  never  done  deadly  sin.  After,  he 
had  the  crown  of  a doctor,  because  he  had  been 
a good  fast  firm  preacher  and  doctor  of  holy 
church.  After,  he  had  the  crown  of  martyrdom, 
as  it  appeared  when  he  was  slain.  The  renown 
thereof  came  into  the  city  of  Milan,  and  the  friars, 
the  clergy,  and  the  people,  came  with  procession 
with  so  great  company  of  people,  that  the  press 
was  so  great  that  they  might  not  enter  into  the 
town,  and  therefore  they  left  the  body  in  the 
abbey  of  S.  Simplician,  and  there  it  abode  all  that 
night  and  so  he  said  the  day  tofore  to  his  fellow. 

The  passion  of  S.  Peter  ensued  much  like  the 
passion  of  our  Lord  in  many  manners,  for  like  as 
our  Lord  suffered  for  the  truth  of  the  faith  that 
he  preached,  so  S.  Peter  suffered  for  the  truth  of 
the  faith  that  he  defended ; and  like  as  Christ 
suffered  of  the  Jews,  so  S.  Peter  suffered  of  the 
people  of  his  own  country,  and  of  the  heretics ; 

Christ  suffered  in  the  time  of  Easter,  so  did  S. 

Peter.  Jesu  Christ  was  sold  for  thirty  pence,  and 
S.  Peter  was  sold  for  forty  pounds.  Jesu  Christ 
showed  his  death  to  his  disciples,  and  S.  Peter 
showed  it  in  plain  predication.  Jesu  Christ  said 
at  his  death : Lord  God,  into  thy  hands  I com- 
mend my  spirit  5 right  so  S.  Peter  did  the  same. 

There  was  a nun  of  Almaine,  of  the  abbey  of 
Oetenbach,  which  had  a grievous  gout  in  her  knee, 
which  had  holden  her  a year  long  and  more,  and 
there  was  no  master  ne  physician  that  might  make 
her  whole.  She  had  great  devotion  to  S.  Peter, 
but  she  might  not  go  thither  because  of  her 


Digitized  by  Google 


/ 


152 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  obedience,  and  because  her  malady  was  so  grievous. 

Life  of  Then  demanded  she  how  many  days’  journey  was 
of  MUan  ^rom  thence  t0  Milan,  and  she  found  that  there 
were  fourteen  journeys.  Then  purposed  she  to 
make  these  journeys  by  her  heart  and  good 
thoughts,  and  she  said  for  every  journey  one 
hundred  paternosters.  And  always  as  she  went 
forth  by  her  mind  in  her  journeys,  she  felt  herself 
more  eased,  and  when  she  came  to  the  last  journey 
in  her  mind  she  found  herself  all  guerished.  Then 
she  said  that  day  all  the  Psalter,  and  after  returned 
all  the  journeys  like  as  she  had  gone  by  her 
thoughts  in  her  heart,  and  after  that  day  she  felt 
never  the  gout. 

There  was  a man  that  had  a villainous  malady 
beneath,  in  such  wise  that  he  voided  blood  six  days 
continually ; he  cried  to  S.  Peter  devoutly,  and  as 
he  had  ended  his  prayer  he  felt  himself  all  whole  ; 
and  after  he  fell  asleep,  and  he  saw  in  his  sleep  a 
friar  preacher  which  had  a face  great  and  brown, 
and  him  seemed  that  he  had  been  fellow  to  S. 


Peter,  and  verily  he  was  of  the  same  form.  This 
friar  gave  to  him  a box  of  ointment  and  said  to 
him:  Have  good  hope  in  S.  Peter  which  late 
hath  shed  his  blood  for  the  faith,  for  he  hath 
healed  thee  of  the  blood  that  ran  from  thee,  and 


when  he  awoke  he  purposed  to  visit  the  sepulchre 
of  S.  Peter. 


There  was  a countess  of  the  castle  Massino, 
which  had  special  devotion  to  S.  Peter  and  fasted 
alway  his  vigil ; now  it  happed  that  she  offered  a 
candle  to  the  altar  of  S.  Peter,  and  anon  the  priest 
for  his  covetise  quenched  the  candle,  but  anon 
after  the  candle  was  light  again  by  himself,  and 
he  quenched  it  again,  once  or  twice,  and  always  as 
soon  as  he  was  gone,  it  lighted  anon  again ; then 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


153 


he  left  that  and  put  out  another  candle  which  a The 
knight  had  offered  in  the  honour  of  S.  Peter, 
which  knight  fasted  also  his  even,  and  the  priest  ^ fyjTl»n 
assayed  two  times  if  he  might  put  it  out,  but  he 
might  not.  Then  said  the  knight  unto  the  priest : 

What,  devil,  seest  thou  not  well  the  miracle,  that 
S.  Peter  will  not  that  they  be  quenched  ? Then 
was  the  priest  abashed  and  all  the  clerks  that  were 
there  with  him,  in  so  much  that  they  fled  out  of 
the  church  and  told  the  miracle  overall. 

There  was  a man  called  Roba  which  had  lost 
at  play  his  gown  and  all  the  money  that  he  had. 

When  he  came  into  his  house  and  saw  himself  in  so 
great  poverty,  he  called  the  devils  and  gave  him- 
self to  them ; then  came  to  him  three  devils  which 
cast  down  Roba  upon  the  soler  and  after  took  him 
by  the  neck,  and  it  seemed  that  they  would  have 
estrangled  him,  in  such  wise  that  he  unnethe  might 
speak.  When  they  that  were  in  the  house  be- 
neath heard  him  cry,  they  went  to  him,  but  the 
devils  said  to  them  that  they  should  return,  and 
they  had  supposed  that  Roba  had  said  so,  and 
returned,  and  after  anon  he  began  to  cry  again  5 
then  apperceived  they  well  that  they  were  the 
devils,  and  fetched  the  priest,  which  conjured  in 
the  name  of  S.  Peter,  the  devils,  that  they  should 
go  their  way.  Then  two  of  them  went  away  and 
the  third  abode,  and  his  friends  brought  him  on 
the  morn  to  the  church  of  the  friars.  Then  there 
came  a friar  named  Guillaume  of  Vercelli,  and  this 
friar  Guillaume  demanded  what  was  his  name, 
and  the  fiend  answered : I am  called  Balcefas ; 
then  the  friar  commanded  that  he  should  go  out, 
and  anon  the  fiend  called  him  by  his  name  as  he 
had  known  him,  and  said : Guillaume,  Guillaume, 

I shall  not  go  out  for  thee,  for  he  is  ours  and 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


154 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Peter 
of  Milan 


hath  given  himself  to  us.  Then  he  conjured  him 
in  the  name  of  S.  Peter  the  martyr,  and  then 
anon  he  went  his  way  and  the  man  was  all  whole, 
and  took  penance  for  his  trespass,  and  was  after  a 
good  man. 

S.  Peter  whiles  he  lived,  it  happed  that  he  dis- 
puted with  a heretic,  but  this  heretic  was  sharp, 
aigre,  and  so  full  of  words  that  S.  Peter  might 
have  of  him  none  audience.  When  he  saw  that, 
he  departed  from  the  disputation  and  went  and 
prayed  our  Lord  that  he  would  give  to  him  place 
and  time  to  sustain  the  faith,  and  that  the  other 
might  be  still  and  speak  not ; and  when  he  came 
again  he  found  this  heretic  in  such  case  that  he 
might  not  speak.  Then  the  other  heretics  fled 
all  confused,  and  the  good  Christian  men  thanked 
our  Lord. 

The  day  that  S.  Peter  was  martyred,  a nun 
that  was  of  the  city  of  Florence  saw  m a vision 
our  Lady  that  styed  up  to  heaven,  and  with  her 
two  persons,  one  on  the  right  side  and  that  other 
on  the  left,  in  the  habit  of  friars,  which  were  by 
her,  and  when  she  demanded  who  it  was,  a voice 
said  to  her  that  it  was  the  soul  of  S.  Peter,  and 
was  found  certainly  that  same  day  he  suffered 
death,  and  therefore  this  nun,  which  was  grievously 
sick,  prayed  to  S.  Peter  for  to  recover  her  health, 
and  he  gat  it  for  her  entirely. 

There  was  a scholar  that  went  from  Maloigne 
unto  Montpellier,  and  in  leaping  he  was  broken 
that  he  might  not  go.  Then  he  remembered  of  a 
woman  that  was  healed  of  a cancer  by  a little  of 
the  earth  of  the  sepulchre  of  S.  Peter,  and  anon 
he  had  trust  in  God,  and  cried  to  S.  Peter  in  such 
manner  as  she  had  done,  and  anon  he  was  whole. 

In  the  city  of  Compostclla  there  was  a man  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


155 


had  great  legs  swollen  like  a barrel,  and  his  womb  The 
like  a woman  with  child,  and  his  face  foul  and  Life  of 
horrible,  so  that  he  seemed  a monster  to  look  on. 

And  it  happed  that  he  went  with  a staff  begging 
his  bread,  and  in  a place  where  he  demanded  on 
a time  alms  of  a good  woman,  she  saw  him  so 
swollen  that  she  said  that  it  were  better  for  him  to 
have  a pit  to  be  buried  in  than  any  other  thing,  for 
he  was  no  better  than  dead,  yet  nevertheless,  said 
she,  I counsel  thee  that  thou  go  into  the  church 
of  the  friars  preachers,  and  pray  S.  Peter  that  he 
make  thee  whole,  and  have  in  him  very  faith  and 
I hope  he  shall  make  thee  all  whole.  This  sick 
man  went  in  the  mom  to  the  church,  but  he  found 
it  shut  and  closed.  Then  he  slept  at  the  door, 
and  he  saw  in  his  sleep  that  a man  in  the  habit  of 
a friar  brought  him  into  the  church,  and  covered 
him  with  his  cope,  and  when  he  awoke  he  found 
himself  in  the  church  and  was  perfectly  whole, 
whereof  much  people  marvelled  because  they  had 
seen  so  short  time  tofore,  him  like  as  he  should 
have  died  forthwith.  There  be  many  more 
miracles  which  were  over  great  a labour  to  write 
all,  for  they  would  occupy  a great  book.  Then 
let  us  pray  to  this  holy  martyr  S.  Peter  that  he 
pray  for  us. 


Here  followeth  of  S.  Philip  the  Apostle^Jirst  of 
the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Philip  is  as  much  to  say  as  the  mouth  of  a 
lamp,  or  the  mouth  of  hands.  Or  it  is  said  of 
philos,  that  is  as  much  to  say  as  love,  and 
of  yper,  that  is  to  say  sovereign,  so  Philip  is 
as  much  to  say  as  love  of  sovereign  things.  Then 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


156 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  is  it  said,  mouth  of  a lamp  for  his  clear  preaching, 
LH®  of  and  mouth  of  the  hands  for  his  busy  work,  and 
o.  r'niiip  jove  0£  thiugg  sovereign  for  his  celestial  love  and 
contemplation. 

Of  the  Life  of  S*  Philip . 

S.  Philip,  when  he  had  preached  in  Scythia  by 
the  space  of  twenty  years,  he  was  taken  of  the 
paynims,  which  would  constrain  him  to  make 
sacrifice  to  an  idol  which  was  called  Mars,  their 
God,  and  anon  under  the  idol  issued  out  a right 
great  dragon,  which  forthwith  slew  the  bishop’s 
son  that  appointed  the  fire  for  to  make  die 
sacrifice,  and  the  two  provost 8 also,  whose  servants 
held  S.  Philip  in  iron  bonds ; and  the  dragon  cor- 
rupted the  people  with  his  breath  that  they  all 
were  sick,  and  S.  Philip  said : Believe  ye  me  and 
break  this  idol  and  set  in  his  place  the  cross  of 
Jesu  Christ  and  after,  worship  ye  it,  and  they  that 
be  here  dead  shall  revive,  and  all  the  sick  people 
shall  be  made  whole.  And  they  that  were  sick 
cried  to  S.  Philip,  and  said : If  thou  mayst  do  so 
much  that  we  may  be  guerished  and  whole,  we 
shall  gladly  do  it.  And  anon  S.  Philip  com- 
manded the  dragon  that  he  should  go  in  to  desert 
without  grieving  or  doing  any  harm  to  any  person, 
and  anon  he  departed  without  appearing  after ; and 
forthwith  S.  Philip  healed  all  them  that  were  sick, 
and  raised  the  three  that  were  dead,  and  were  all 
baptized,  and  preached  to  them  the  space  of  a year 
the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ.  And  when  he  had 
ordained  priests  and  deacons,  after,  he  departed  and 
came  into  the  city  of  Hierapolin  in  Asia,  where 
he  destroyed  the  heresy  of  the  Hebronites,  which 
said  and  preached  that  Jesu  Christ  had  not  taken 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


157 


very  flesh  human,  but  only  the  semblance  of  the  The 
body  human.  In  this  city  were  his  two  daughters,  Life  of  ^ 
by  whom  our  Lord  had  converted  much  people  to 
the  Christian  faith. 

S.  Philip  tofore  his  death  made  to  come  tofore 
him  all  the  bishops,  seven  days  tofore  his  death, 
and  also  all  the  priests,  and  said  to  them : These 
seven  days  hath  our  Lord  given  to  me  respite  for 
to  warn  you  to  do  well.  And  he  was  of  the  age 
of  eighty-seven  years.  And  after  this  the  paynims 
took  and  held  him,  and  fastened  him  to  the  cross, 
like  unto  his  master,  and  so  he  yielded  up  his  soul 
and  died.  And  his  body  was  worshipfully  buried 
there,  and  his  two  daughters  died  long  after  him 
and  were  also  buried,  that  one  on  the  right  side, 
and  that  other  on  the  left  side  of  the  body  of  their 
father. 

Isidore  writeth  in  the  book  of  the  life  and 
death  of  saints,  and  saith  that  Philip  preached  to 
the  Frenchmen,  and  to  men  that  were  in  darkness, 
he  enlightened  them  in  the  faith.  After,  he  was 
taken  in  the  city  of  Hierapolin  of  the  paynims, 
and  of  them  stoned  and  crucified,  of  whom  the 
martyrology  of  holy  church  speaketh  not.  But  of 
another  Philip,  which  was  one  of  the  seven 
deacons,  S.  Jerome  saith  in  the  martyrology  that 
he  was  buried  in  the  city  of  Caesarea,  where  God 
showed  many  fair  miracles  for  him,  beside  whom 
three  of  his  daughters  be  buried,  and  the  fourth 
daughter  lieth  at  Ephesus.  The  first  Philip 
differenceth  from  this  Philip,  for  he  was  an  apostle 
and  this  was  a deacon.  The  apostle  resteth  at 
Hierapolin,  and  the  deacon  at  Caesarea;  he  had 
two  daughters,  and  this  four.  Though  Historia 
Ecclesiastica  saith  that  Philip  the  apostle  had  four 
daughters  prophetesses,  but  it  is  herein  more  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


iS8 


S. 


The  believe  S.  Jerome.  Then  let  us  pray  to  the  holy 
Life  of  apostle  S.  Philip  that  he  pray  for  us  to  our  Lord 
James  ^at  we  may  come  to  his  bliss.  Amen. 


Here  followetb  of  S.  James  the  Less • 

James  is  as  much  to  say  as  supplanter  or  sup- 
planting a feast,  or  making  ready.  Or  James  is 
said  of  ja  and  of  cobar,  which  is  as  much  to  say 
as  the  burden  or  weight  of  God.  Or  James  may 
be  said  of  jaculum,  a dart  and  copis  smiting,  which 
is  to  say  smitten  with  a dart,  or  smitten  with 
glaives.  He  was  said  a supplanter  of  the  world, 
for  he  despised  it  in  supplanting  hastily  the  devil. 
And  he  is  said  making  ready,  for  always  he  made 
ready  his  body  to  do  well.  For  as  Gregory  of 
Nyssen  saith : We  have  in  us  three  evil  passions 
which  come  of  evil  nourishing,  or  of  right  false 
conversation,  or  of  evil  custom  of  the  body,  or  of 
the  vice  of  ignorance,  and  they  be  cured  by  good 
conversation,  and  for  to  haunt  studies  of  good 
exercitation  of  doctrine.  So  then  the  blessed 
James  is  escried,  for  he  was  always  ready  in 
his  body  to  all  good.  He  is  said  the  burden  or 
weight  of  good  or  godly  manners,  that  he  used 
by  exercitation  of  virtues.  He  was  smitten  with 
glaives  by  martyrdom. 

Of  S . James  the  Less . 

James  the  apostle  is  said  the  Less,  how  well  that 
he  was  elder  of  age  than  was  S.  James  the  More, 
because  like  as  is  in  religion  he  that  entered  first  is 
called  aine  and  great,  and  he  that  cometh  after 
shall  be  called  less,  though  he  be  the  older,  and 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


159 


in  this  wise  was  this  S.  James  called  the  less.  He  The 
was  called  also  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  because  Life  of 
he  resembled  much  well  our  Lord  in  body,  in  ^ 
visage,  and  of  manner.  He  was  called  James 
the  Just  for  his  right  great  holiness,  for  S. 

Jerome  recordeth  that  he  was  so  holy  that 
the  people  strove  how  they  might  touch  the  hem 
of  his  robe  or  mantle.  He  was  also  called 
James  the  son  of  Alpheus.  This  James  was 
ever  holy  after  that  he  issued  out  of  his  mother's 
womb.  He  never  drank  wine,  mead,  ne  cider, 
ne  never  ate  flesh,  ne  never  rasor  touched  his 
head,  ne  he  never  bathed.  He  knelt  so  oft  in 
prayers  that  his  knees  were  as  hard  as  the  horn  ol 
a camel.  He  sang  in  Jerusalem  the  first  mass 
that  ever  was  sung  therein,  and  he  was  first  bishop 
of  Jerusalem.  Josephus  recordeth  that  he  had 
avowed  at  the  death  of  our  Lord  that  he  would 
never  eat  till  our  Lord  were  risen  from  death  to 
life ; then  on  Easter  day  our  Lord  appeared  to 
him  and  said  : Lay  the  table,  fair  brother,  and  eat, 
for  the  son  of  the  Virgin  is  risen  from  death  to 
life.  Then  took  he  the  bread  and  made  the 
benediction  and  gave  it  to  him.  The  seventh  year 
after,  the  apostles  assembled  in  Jerusalem  on 
Easter  day,  there  S.  James  demanding  what  God 
had  done  by  them  tofore  the  people,  that  they 
should  tell.  And  when  S.  James  had  preached 
seven  days  in  the  temple  with  the  other  apostles, 
Caiaphas  and  some  other  would  have  been  baptized, 
and  then  entered  in  a man  suddenly  in  to  the 
temple  and  said  crying : O ye  sirs,  what  will  ye 
do?  why  suffer  ye  thus  to  be  deceived  of  these 
enchanters  ? Be  ye  ware  and  keep  you,  that  they 
deceive  you  not.  He  moved  so  much  the  people 
that  they  would  have  stoned  the  apostles.  Then 

VOL.  III.  l 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


i6o 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  this  fellow  went  up  to  the  lectern  whereas  S. 

Life  of  James  preached,  and  threw  him  down  backward, 
S.  James  an(j  from  then  forthon  ever  after  he  halted.  And 
this  was  done  the  seventh  year  after  the  ascension 
of  our  Lord,  and  he  was  bishop  there  by  the  space 
of  thirty  years.  And  in  his  thirtieth  year,  when 
the  Jews  saw  that  they  might  not  slay  S.  Paul 
because  he  had  appealed  to  the  emperor  to  Rome, 
and  was  sent  forth  to  Rome,  they  turned  all  their 
persecution  against  S.  James,  and  said  to  him  : 
The  people  is  deceived,  for  they  supposed  that 
your  Jesus  were  Messias.  Then  for  as  much  as 
thou  art  much  believed,  we  pray  thee  that  thou 
assemble  the  people,  and  that  thou  stand  up  on 
high,  and  show  to  them  that  it  is  not  he,  for  thou 
art  so  just  that  we  all  shall  believe  in  thee.  Then 
S.  James  went  up  on  the  front  of  the  temple  on 
Easter  day,  and  all  the  people  were  assembled 
beneath.  Then  said  the  Jews  to  him,  with  an 
high  voice : Right  just  and  true  man,  we  know 
well  that  thou  shalt  not  lie,  show  to  us  of  Jesus 
that  was  hanged  upon  the  cross  that  which  thou 
knowest,  for  all  the  world  is  deceived.  Then 
answered  he  with  an  high  voice : Wherefore 
demand  ye  me  of  the  son  of  the  virgin  ? I say 
to  you  that  he  is  now  in  heaven,  and  sitteth  on  the 
right  side  of  God  the  Father,  and  shall  come  to 
deem  the  living  and  the  dead.  When  the  Christian 
men  had  heard  him  they  were  much  glad,  but  the 
Pharisees  and  the  masters  of  the  law  repented  them 
of  this  that  they  had  made  him  to  say,  and  bear 
this  witness  tofore  the  people,  and  took  counsel 
together  for  to  cast  him  down,  for  to  make  the 
people  afeard,  because  they  should  not  believe  him, 
and  they  cried:  O the  just  man  hath  erred  at 
this  time,  and  after  they  threw  him  down  and  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  161 

people  began  to  stone  him,  but  he  was  on  his  knees,  The 
and  said : Fair  Lord  God,  pardon  them,  for  they  Life  of 
wot  not  what  they  do.  Then  cried  out  one  of  J®01®8 
the  sons  of  the  priest  named  Jacob : Sirs,  leave 
this  just  man  in  peace.  But  there  was  a man  in 
that  company  took  a fuller’s  staff  and  smote  him 
on  the  head,  that  his  brain  fell  all  abroad,  and  thus 
by  martyrdom  he  finished  his  life  and  was  there 
buried,  nigh  unto  the  temple.  And  the  people 
would  have  slain  these  malefactors  because  they 
had  slain  him,  but  they  fled.  This  was  done  in 
the  time  of  Nero  the  year  of  our  Lord  fifty-seven. 

Josephus  saith  that  for  this  great  sin  of  the  death 
of  S.  James  was  Jerusalem  afterward  destroyed,  for 
tofore  that  the  destruction  came,  God  showed 
marvellous  signs.  For  there  was  a star,  right 
clear  and  shining,  which  had  the  form  of  a sword, 
that  hung  over  Jerusalem ; but  this  token,  ne  the 
tokens  hereafter  following,  came  not  only  for  the 
death  of  S.  James,  but  for  the  death  of  our  Lord 
Jesu  Christ  principally,  for  he  said : There  shall 
not  in  thee  be  left  a stone  upon  a stone.  But 
because  our  Lord  would  not  the  death  of  sinners, 
but  that  he  would  they  should  do  penance  and 
repent  them,  he  abode  forty  years,  and  called  them 
unto  penance  by  his  apostles,  and  most  by  S. 

James,  brother  of  our  Lord,  which  continually 
preached  to  them.  For  in  this  forty  years  were 
many  signs  and  prodigies  showed  to  them  as 
Josephus  rehearseth,  of  which  the  star,  like  the 
sword,  was  one,  which  was  seen  over  the  city  a 
whole  year  during,  and  burning  with  great  bright 
flames.  The  next  year  after,  in  a feast  of  Easter, 
there  was  a clearness  and  light  about  tne  temple  in 
the  night,  that  it  was  like  unto  clear  day.  In  that 
same  time  there  was  a cow  brought  forth  to  be 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


162 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  sacrificed,  which  anon  calved  or  brought  forth  a 
S *Tam°*  agai°8t  kind.  After  this  a little  time,  about 
* going  down  of  the  sun,  there  was  seen  in  the  air 

carts  and  wains,  and  great  company  of  men  of 
arms  that  environed  the  city  suddenly.  In  a feast 
of  Whitsuntide,  which  is  called  Pentecost,  the 
priests  went  in  to  the  temple  by  night  for  to  do 
their  mysteries,  and  they  heard  a voice  saying: 
Let  us  go  hence  from  this  place.  And  four  years 
after,  tofore  that  the  destruction  came,  a man 
whose  name  was  Jesus,  the  son  of  Ananias,  began 
to  cry  suddenly:  The  voice  of  the  orient!  the 
voice  of  the  Occident ! the  voice  of  four  winds 
upon  Jerusalem ! Woe  on  the  husbands ! woe 
upon  the  wives ! and  woe  upon  all  the  people ! 
The  said  man  was  taken,  smitten,  and  beaten, 
tormented,  and  brought  tofore  the  judge,  and  he 
never  wept  ne  cried  mercy,  but  ever  persevered, 
and  cried  howling  the  same  words,  adding  thereto: 
Woe ! woe ! to  Jerusalem.  All  this  saith  Josephus, 
and  yet  for  all  these  tokens,  warnings,  and  prodigies 
the  Jews  were  never  afeard.  Then,  forty  years 
after  the  passion  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  came 
Titus  and  Vespasian  against  Jerusalem,  and  de- 
stroyed it.  The  cause,  and  by  whom  it  was 
destroyed,  is  recorded  in  an  history,  though  it  be 
not  authentic.  For  Pilate,  which  doubted  the  fury 
and  anger  of  the  emperor  Tiberius,  because  he  had 
wrongfully  judged  and  condemned  Jesu  Christ  the 
innocent,  sent  one  of  his  servants  for  to  excuse 
him,  and  the  servant’s  name  was  AJban.  In  this 
time  Vespasian  was  governor  of  Galatia  for  the 
emperor,  and  the  messenger  of  Pilate  which  would 
have  gone  to  Rome,  was  constrained  by  a contrary 
wind  to  arrive  in  Galatia,  and  was  brought  to 
Vespasian.  For  the  custom  of  the  country  was 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  163 

that  who  was  taken  on  the  sea,  and  brought  so  in  The 
against  his  will,  should  be  at  the  will  of  the  lord,  °* 
body  and  goods.  And  when  Vespasian  saw  him  J*®®* 
he  demanded  him  what  he  was  and  from  whence 
he  came;  he  said  that  he  was  of  Jerusalem.  Then 
said  Vespasian : Ah  Lord  God ! in  that  country 
were  wont  to  be  good  masters  and  much  gooa 
surgeons;  my  friend,  said  he,  canst  thou  anything  ot 
surgery  ? This  said  he  because  he  had  in  his  nose 
a botch  full  of  worms  from  his  youth,  and  never 
might  man  be  found  that  might  heal  him  of  it. 

The  messenger  of  Pilate  answered  and  said  that  he 
could  nothing  thereof.  Vespasian  said : If  thou 
heal  me  not  I shall  slay  thee.  The  messenger 
said:  He  that  enlumined  the  blind,  and  chased 
devils  out  of  men,  and  raised  dead  men  to  life  in 
our  country,  knoweth  well  that  I cannot  heal  thee, 
but  he  can  well  heal  thee  if  he  will.  Then 
demanded  Vespasian  what  he  was.  He  said  to 
him  that  it  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  they  of 
Jerusalem  had  slain  wrongfully  for  envy,  and  if 
thou  wilt  believe  in  him  he  shall  heal  thee.  Then 
said  Vespasian : I believe  well  that  he  that  raised 
dead  men  may  Well  heal  and  make  me  all  whole ; 
and  saying  these  words  the  wasps  fell  from  his 
nose  with  the  botch  within  which  they  were,  and 
forthwith  he  was  made  perfectly  whole,  whereof 
he  had  much  great  joy  and  said : I am  certain 
that  he  that  hath  thus  made  me  whole  was  the 
very  son  of  God.  I shall  demand  licence  of 
the  emperor  Tiberius,  and  I shall  go  destroy 
the  cursed  traitors  that  have  slain  this  man ; and 
then  he  let  Alban,  the  messenger  of  Pilate,  go 
where  he  would. 

After  this  Vespasian  went  to  Rome,  and  gat 
licence  of  the  emperor  for  to  destroy  this  people 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


x64  the  golden  legend 

The  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  assembled  his  host 
Life  of  in  the  time  of  Nero  the  emperor,  and  came 
p.  James  guci(ienly,  the  Jews  then  being  the  most  part  in 
Jerusalem  on  Easter  day,  and  besieged  the  town, 
for  on  that  day  all  the  Jews  of  the  country  were 
come  to  the  feast,  so  that  they  were  suddenly 
enclosed.  Now  was  it  so  that  tofore  that  Ves- 
pasian came,  the  good  men  of  the  city  were 
warned  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  they  should  go 
out  of  the  city,  and  they  went  to  a place  called 
Pella,  because  that  the  vengeance  should  not 
fall  on  them,  but  on  the  wicked  people  of  the 
Jews. 

There  was  another  city  of  the  Jewry  named 
Jonapatam,  in  which  Josephus  was  duke,  which 
Vespasian  first  assailed,  but  Josephus,  with  such 
men  as  he  had,  resisted  them  manly,  but  at  the 
last,  when  Josephus  saw  the  destruction  of  it  and 
might  no  longer  keep  it*  he  took  with  him  twelve 
Tews  and  hid  him  in  a cave  or  an  house  under  the 
earth,  where  they  were  four  days  without  meat 
and  drink  in  great  anguish  and  affliction.  Then 
the  Jews,  being  there  without  consent  of  Josephus, 
had  liefer  die  than  be  subject  or  put  themselves 
in  servitude  to  Vespasian,  and  would  slay  them- 
selves, and  offer  their  blood  in  sacrifice  to  God. 
And  because  Josephus  was  the  most  worthy  and 
noble  of  them,  they  would  slay  him  first,  by  whose 
blood  God  might  best  be  pleased,  or  else,  as  it  is 
said  in  the  chronicle,  that  each  of  them  should 
slay  other  rather  than  they  should  come  into  the 
hands  of  the  Romans.  Then  Josephus,  a prudent 
man,  and  not  willing  to  die,  constituted  and 
ordained  himself  judge  of  the  death  and  sacrifice, 
and  who  that  first  should  be  slain ; he  ordained 
that  between  two  and  two  should  be  drawn  lots. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


165 


and  so,  the  lot  given,  now  one  was  slain,  now  The 
another,  till  at  the  last  all  were  dead  save  Josephus 
and  one  other.  Then  Josephus,  being  a strong  * •'am 
man  and  a light,  caught  the  sword  to  him  and 
asked  his  fellow  whether  he  had  liefer  live  or  die, 
and  commanded  him  shortly  without  delay  to  tell 
him ; and  he  sore  dreading  said  : I forsake  not  to 
live  if  I may  by  thy  grace  get  and  keep  my  life. 

Then  Josephus  spake  to  a servant  of  Vespasian, 
and  did  so  much  that  he  gat  his  life  of  Vespasian, 
and  then  he  was  brought  to  Vespasian,  and 
Vespasian  said  to  him : Thou  shouldst  have  died 
if  thou  hadst  not  gotten  grace  by  the  prayer  and 
request  of  this  man ; and  Josephus  answered : If 
any  thing  be  done  amiss  it  may  turn  to  better  5 and 
Vespasian  said:  Who  that  is  bound,  what  may 
he  do  ? Josephus  answered : Somewhat  may  I 
do  if  thou  wilt  give  me  audience.  Vespasian 
said : I will  well  that  thou  say,  and  if  thou  say 
any  good  thou  shalt  be  peaceably  heard.  And 
Josephus  said:  The  emperor  of  Rome  is  dead, 
and  the  senate  hath  made  thee  emperor;  and 
Vespasian  answered : If  thou  be  a prophet,  why 
hast  thou  not  prophesied  to  the  people  of  this  city 
that  they  shall  be  taken  by  my  hand?  And 
Josephus  said : I have  well  forty  days  warned 
them.  And  in  the  meanwhile  came  the  messengers 
from  Rome  and  affirmed  that  Vespasian  was  made 
emperor,  and  led  him  to  Rome.  All  this  recounteth 
Eusebius  in  his  chronicle.  Josephus  said  tofore  to 
Vespasian  as  well  of  the  death  of  the  emperor  as 
of  his  election  to  be  emperor.  And  Vespasian 
left  his  son  Titus  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem. 

It  is  read  also  in  the  same  history,  though  it  be 
apocrypha,  that  when  Titus  heard  that  his  father 
was  enhanced  into  the  empire,  he  was  so  glad  and 


4T 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


1 66 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  had  so  much  joy,  that  all  his  sinews  were  shrunken 
Life  of  and  were  80  feeble  that  he  was  sore  tormented 
o.  James  t^e  p^gy.  And  Josephus  hearing  thereof 
diligently  enquired  the  cause  of  the  sickness,  the 
time  thereof  and  the  manner.  The  cause  ne 
the  sickness  were  not  known,  but  the  time  was 
when  he  heard  of  the  election  of  his  father  to  the 
empire.  Josephus,  a wise  and  a prudent  man, 
considered  the  time  of  the  coming  of  the  sickness, 
and  conjectured  that  it  came  of  overmuch  joy  and 
abounding  gladness,  and  remembering  that  con- 
traries be  cured  by  their  contraries,  for  that  which 
cometh  of  love  is  cured  by  hate  ofttimes,  and 
began  to  enquire  if  there  were  any  man  that  the 
prince  hated  much.  And  it  was  that  he  had  a 
servant  whom  he  held  in  prison,  and  hated  him  so 
much  that  in  no  wise  he  might  look  on  him  ne 
hear  him  named.  Then  he  said : Titus,  if  thou 
desire  to  be  whole,  who  that  ever  come  in  my 
fellowship  must  be  here  sure  and  safe.  Then 
Josephus  made  the  dinner  to  be  ready  and  set 
himself  against  him,  and  the  servant  that  Titus 
most  hated  sat  on  his  right  side,  whom  as  soon  as 
Titus  had  beholden  he  began  to  chauffe  and  to  be 
marvellous  angry  for  anguish.  Then  he  which 
was  infrigidate  and  cold  for  joy,  stretched  out  his 
sinews,  and  was  made  all  whole  by  the  burning 
heat  of  anger  and  was  all  whole. 

All  this  foresaid  of  Josephus,  I remit  it  to  the 
reader’s  judgment  whether  he  will  believe  it  or  not, 
but  Titus  lay  at  the  siege  two  years  tofore  the 
city,  and  so  long  that  the  famine  oppressed  so 
sore,  that  the  fathers  from  the  children,  and  the 
children  from  the  fathers,  and  husbands  from  the 
wives,  and  wives  from  the  husbands,  plucked  the 
meat  out  of  others*  mouths ; and  young  men  that 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


167 


had  been  right  strong  fell  down  dead  in  the  The 
streets  and  ways.  They  that  should  bury  the  dead  °* 
fell  down  ofttimes  dead  upon  them  that  were  dead,  * ■'ames 
and  because  they  were  not  borne  away  nor  they 
might  not  suffer  the  stench  of  the  dead  bodies, 
they  ordained  that  the  commons  of  the  town  should 
cast  them  over  the  walls  into  the  ditches  because 
they  might  not  endure  the  stench  to  bury  them. 

And  when  Titus,  which  went  about  the  city,  saw 
the  ditches  so  full  of  carrions  which  corrupted  all 
the  country  with  the  stench,  he  held  up  his  hands 
to  heaven  weeping,  and  said : Lord  God,  now  see 
I well  that  this  is  not  by  me  but  by  thee  which 
herein  takest  vengeance  5 for  then  they  of  the  town 
within  had  so  great  default  that  they  ate  their 
shoes  and  latchets.  There  was  a gentlewoman  in 
the  town  which  had  a child  to  whom  she  gave 
suck,  and  for  hunger  that  she  had  she  strangled 
and  slew  this  child,  and  roasted  that  one  half  and 
kept  that  other  for  to  eat.  It  happed  that  the 
governors  of  the  town  which  went  to  search, 
smelled  the  savour  of  this  roast,  and  brake  up  the 
door  and  threatened  to  slay  the  woman  if  she  gave 
to  them  not  of  her  meat.  Then  she  showed  to 
them  that  other  deal  of  her  child  that  she  had 
kept,  and  said  : If  ye  will,  I shall  gladly  give  you 
part.  Then  had  they  so  great  horror  thereof  that 
they  might  not  speak.  Then  said  she : This  was 
my  son,  the  sin  is  mine  and  cometh  on  me,  eat  on 
hardily  for  I have  eaten  part  tofore,  for  ye  loved 
him  not  so  well  as  I did  that  was  his  mother. 

And  if  pity  move  you  that  ye  leave  to  eat  of  him, 

I that  have  eaten  that  one  half,  know  ye  for  certain 
that  I shall  well  eat  that  other  half.  They  then, 
being  abhorred  of  this  inhumanity,  went  their  way. 

After  this  then,  when  Vespasian  had  been  emperor 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


1 68 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  two  years,  Titus  took  Jerusalem  and  destroyed  all. 
Life  of  and  the  temple  also ; and  like  as  the  Jews  had 
S.  James  jX)Ugj1t  our  Lord  for  thirty  pence,  so  gave  he 
thirty  Jews  for  one  penny.  And  like  as  Josephus 
recordeth,  he  sold  so  four  score  and  seventeen 
thousand,  and  eleven  hundred  thousand  were 
perished  by  famine  and  by  sword.  It  is  read 
that  when  Titus  entered  Jerusalem  he  saw  a 
thick  wall  which  he  did  do  perish  and  break, 
and  when  a hole  was  made  therein  they  saw  there 
a fair  old  man,  hoar  and  venerable  of  cheer,  whom 
they  demanded  long  what  he  was.  At  the  last  he 
answered  and  said  he  was  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  a 
city  of  Judea,  and  that  the  Jews  had  mured  him 
therein  because  he  had  buried  Christ,  and  saying 
more,  that  from  that  time  until  this  now  I have 
been  fed  with  heavenly  bread  and  drink,  and 
comforted  with  divine  light.  Nevertheless,  in  the 
gospel  of  Nicodemus  it  is  said  that  when  the 
Jews  had  shut  him  up,  Christ  in  his  resurrection 
took  him  thence  and  led  him  in  to  Arimathea. 
It  may  well  be  after,  when  he  ceased  not  to  preach 
of  Christ,  that  the  Jews  so  mured  him  up.  After 
this,  when  Vespasian  was  dead,  Titus  his  son  was 
made  emperor  after  him,  and  was  so  debonair,  so 
liberal  and  of  so  great 'bounty,  that  there  had  none 
been  like  him,  for  as  Jerome  saith : That  day  that 
he  had  not  given  a gift,  ne  had  done  no  good,  at 
even  he  said  to  his  friends,  O my  friends,  this  day 
have  I lost.  After  this,  long  time,  it  happed  that 
some  Jews  would  re-edify  Jerusalem.  And  on 
the  first  morning  that  they  went  to  work  they 
found  crosses  on  the  dew,  and  then  they  fled ; and 
after  they  came  again  and  began  to  re-edify  again, 
and  then  they  found  bloody  crosses,  and  then  they 
fled  away  again ; and  the  third  time  they  came 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


169 


again,  and  out  of  the  earth  issued  a fire  and  burnt  The 

and  wasted  them  all.  Inven- 

tion of 
the  Holy 
Cross 

Of  the  invention  of  the  Holy  Cross , and first  of  this 
word  invention. 

The  invention  of  the  holy  cross  is  said  because 
that  this  day  the  holy  cross  was  found.  For 
tofore  it  was  found  of  Seth  in  Paradise  terrestrial, 
like  as  it  shall  be  said  hereafter,  and  also  it  was 
found  of  Solomon  in  the  Mount  of  Lebanon,  and 
of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  in  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
and  of  the  Jews  in  the  water  of  Piscine,  and  on 
this  day  it  was  found  of  Helena  in  the  Mount  of 
Calvary. 


Of  the  Holy  Cross. 

The  holy  cross  was  found  two  hundred  years 
after  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  It  is  read  in 
the  gospel  of  Nicodemus  that,  when  Adam  waxed 
sick,  Seth  his  son  went  to  the  gate  of  Paradise 
terrestrial  for  to  get  the  oil  of  mercy  for  to  anoint 
withal  his  father’s  body.  Then  appeared  to  him 
S.  Michael  the  angel,  and  said  to  him:  Travail  not 
thou  in  vain  for  this  oil,  for  thou  mayst  not  have 
it  till  five  thousand  and  five  hundred  years  be  past, 
how  be  it  that  from  Adam  unto  the  passion  of  our 
Lord  were  but  five  thousand  one  hundred  and  thirty- 
three  years.  In  another  place  it  is  read  that  the 
angel  brought  him  a branch,  and  commanded  him 
to  plant  it  the  Mount  of  Lebanon.  Yet  find  we 
in  another  place  that  he  gave  to  him  of  the  tree 
that  Adam  ate  of,  and  said  to  him  that  when  that 
bare  fruit  he  should  be  guerished  and  all  whole. 
When  Seth  ’came  again  he  found  his  father  dead 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


170 

The  and  planted  this  tree  upon  his  grave,  and  it  endured 
there  unto  the  time  of  Solomon.  And  because 

the  Holy  8aw  ^at  lt  was  ^ do  ^ew  down 

Cross  and  set  lt  in  bis  bouse  named  Saltus.  And  when 
the  Queen  of  Sheba  came  to  visit  Solomon,  she 
worshipped  this  tree,  because  she  said  the  Saviour 
of  all  the  world  should  be  hanged  thereon,  by 
whom  the  realm  of  the  Jews  shall  be  defaced 
and  cease.  Solomon  for  this  cause  made  it  to  be 
taken  up  and  dolven  deep  in  the  ground.  Now  it 
happed  after,  that  they  of  Jerusalem  did  do  make 
a great  pit  for  a piscina,  whereas  the  ministers 
of  the  temple  should  wash  their  beasts  that  they 
should  sacrifice,  and  there  found  this  tree,  and 
this  piscina  had  such  virtue  that  the  angels 
descended  and  moved  the  water,  and  the  first  sick 
man  that  descended  into  the  water,  after  the 
moving,  was  made  whole  of  whatsoever  sickness 
he  was  sick  of.  And  when  the  time  approached 
of  the  passion  of  our  Lord,  this  tree  arose  out  of 
the  water,  and  floated  above  the  water,  and  of  this 
piece  of  timber  made  the  Jews  the  cross  of  our 
Lord.  Then,  after  this  history,  the  cross  by 
which  we  be  saved  came  of  the  tree  by  which  we 
were  damned,  and  the  water  of  that  piscina  had 
not  his  virtue  only  of  the  angel  but  of  the  tree. 
With  this  tree,  whereof  the  cross  was  made,  there 
was  a tree  that  went  overthwart,  on  which  the  arms 
of  our  Lord  were  nailed,  and  another  piece  above, 
which  was  the  table  wherein  the  title  was  written, 
and  another  piece  wherein  the  socket  or  mortice 
was  made,  wherein  the  body  of  the  cross  stood  in, 
so  that  there  were  four  manner  of  trees,  that  is  of 
palm,  of  cypress,  of  cedar,  and  of  olive.  So  each 
of  these  four  pieces  was  of  one  of  these  trees. 
This  blessed  cross  was  put  in  the  earth,  and  hid 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  171 

by  the  space  of  a hundred  years  and  more,  but  the 
mother  of  the  emperor,  which  was  named  Helena, 
found  it  in  this  manner.  For  Constantine  came 
with  a great  multitude  of  barbarians  nigh  unto  the 
river  of  the  Danube,  which  would  have  gone 
over  for  to  have  destroyed  all  the  country.  And 
when  Constantine  had  assembled  his  host  he  went 
and  set  them  against  that  other  party,  but  as  soon 
as  he  began  to  pass  the  river  he  was  much  afeard 
because  he  should  on  the  morn  have  battle.  And 
in  the  night,  as  he  slept  in  his  bed,  an  angel  awoke 
him,  and  showed  to  him  the  sign  of  the  cross  in 
heaven,  and  said  to  him : Behold  on  high  in 
heaven.  Then  saw  he  the  cross  made  of  right 
clear  light,  and  was  written  thereupon  with  letters 
of  gold:  In  this  sign  thou  shalt  overcome  the 
battle.  Then  was  he  all  comforted  of  this  vision  • 
and  on  the  morn  he  put  in  his  banner  the  cross 
and  made  it  to  be  borne  tofore  him  and  his  host, ^ and 
after,  smote  in  the  host  of  his  enemies  and  slew 
and  chased  great  plenty.  After  this  he  did  do 
call  the  bishops  of  the  idols,  and  demanded  them 
to  what  God  the  sign  of  the  cross  appertained. 
And  when  they  could  not  answer,  some  Christian 
men  that  were  there  told  to  him  the  mystery  of 
the  cross,  and  informed  him  in  the  faith  of  the 
Trinity.  Then  anon  he  believed  perfectly  in  God 
and  did  do  baptize  him,  and  after  it  happed  that 
Constantine  his  son  remembered  the  victory  of  his 
father,  and  sent  to  Helena  his  mother  for  to  find 
the  holy  cross.  Then  Helena  went  in  to  Jeru- 
salem and  did  do  assemble  all  the  wise  men  of 
the  country,  and  when  they  were  assembled  they 
would  fain  know  wherefore  they  were  called. 
Then  one  Judas  said  to  them:  I wot  well  that 
she  will  know  of  us  where  the  cross  of  Jesu  Christ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The 
Inven- 
tion of 
the  Holy 
Cross 


172 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  was  laid,  but  beware  you  all  that  none  of  you  tell 
limn-  her,  for  I wot  well,  then  shall  our  law  be  destroyed. 
theHolv  ^or  ^ac^eu8»  mine  father,  said  to  Simon  my 
Cross  father,  and  my  father  said  to  me  at  his  death : Be 
well  ware  that  for  no  torment  that  ye  may  suffer, 
tell  not  where  the  cross  of  Jesu  Christ  was  laid, 
for  after  that  it  shall  be  found  the  Jews  shall 
reign  no  more,  but  the  Christian  men  that  wor- 
shipped the  cross  shall  then  reign ; and  verily  this 
Jesus  was  the  son  of  God.  Then  demanded  I my 
father  wherefore  had  they  hanged  him  on  the 
cross  sith  it  was  known  that  he  was  the  son  of 
God.  Then  he  said  to  me:  Fair  son,  I never 
accorded  thereto,  but  gainsaid  it  always,  but  the 
Pharisees  did  it  because  he  reproved  their  vices ; 
but  he  arose  on  the  third  day  and,  his  disciples 
seeing,  he  ascended  into  heaven  ; then  because  that 
Stephen,  thy  brother,  believed  in  him  the  Jews 
stoned  him  to  death.  Then,  when  Judas  had  said 
these  words  to  his  fellows,  they  answered : We 
never  heard  of  such  things,  nevertheless  keep  thee 
well,  if  the  queen  demand  thee  thereof,  that  thou 
say  no  thing  to  her.  When  the  queen  had  called 
them  and  demanded  them  the  place  where  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ  had  been  crucified,  they  would 
never  tell  ne  enseign  her.  Then  commanded 
she  to  burn  them  all,  but  then  they  doubted  and 
were  afraid,  and  delivered  Judas  to  her  and  said : 
Lady,  this  man  is  the  son  of  a prophet  and  of  a 
just  man,  and  knoweth  right  well  the  law,  and  can 
tell  to  you  all  things  that  ye  shall  demand  him. 
Then  the  queen  let  all  the  others  go  and  retained 
Judas  without  more.  Then  she  showed  to  him 
his  life  and  death,  and  bade  him  choose  which  he 
would.  Show  to  me,  said  she,  the  place  named 
Golgotha  where  our  Lord  was  crucified,  because  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


173 


to  the  end  that  we  may  find  the  cross.  Then  said  The 
Judas : It  is  two  hundred  years  passed  and  more,  Inren- 
and  I was  not  then  yet  born.  Then  said  to  him 
the  lady : By  him  that  was  crucified,  I shall  make  Cross  ' 
thee  perish  for  hunger  if  thou  tell  not  to  me  the 
truth.  Then  made  she  him  to  be  cast  into  a dry 
pit  and  there  tormented  him  by  hunger  and  evil 
rest.  When  he  had  been  seven  days  in  that  pit, 
then  said  he : If  I might  be  drawn  out,  I should 
say  the  truth.  Then  he  was  drawn  out,  and  when 
he  came  to  the  place,  anon  the  earth  moved,  and  a 
fume  of  great  sweetness  was  felt,  in  such  wise  that 
Judas  smote  his  hands  together  for  joy,  and  said : In 
truth,  Jesu  Christ,  thou  art  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 

It  was  so  that  Adrian  the  emperor  had  do  make, 
in  the  same  place  where  the  cross  lay,  a temple  of 
a goddess,  because  that  all  they  that  came  in  that 
place  should  adore  that  goddess,  but  the  queen  did 
do  destroy  the  temple.  Then  Judas  made  him 
ready  and  began  to  dig,  and  when  he  came  to 
twenty  paces  deep  he  found  three  crosses  and 
brought  them  to  the  queen,  and  because  he  knew 
not  which  was  the  cross  of  our  Lord,  he  laid  them 
in  the  middle  of  the  city  and  abode  the  demon- 
strance of  God ; and  about  the  hour  of  noon  there 
was  the  corps  of  a young  man  brought  to  be  buried* 

Judas  retained  the  bier,  and  laid  upon  it  one  of  the 
crosses,  and  after  the  second,  and  when  he  laid  on 
it  the  third,  anon  the  body  that  was  dead  came 
again  to  life. 

Then  cried  the  devil  in  the  air : Judas,  what 
hast  thou  done  ? Thou  hast  done  the  contrary 
that  the  other  Judas  did,  for  by  him  I have  won 
many  souls,  and  by  thee  I shall  lose  many,  by  him 
I reigned  on  the  people,  and  by  thee  I have  lost 
my  realm,  nevertheless  I shall  yield  to  thee  this 


Digitized  by 


Google 


174 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  bounty,  for  I shall  send  one  that  shall  punish  thee. 
Inven-  And  that  was  accomplished  by  Julian  the  apostate, 
th^Hol  whi°h  tormented  him  afterward,  when  he  was 
Cross  bishop  of  Jerusalem.  And  when  Judas  heard  him, 
he  cursed  the  devil  and  said  to  him : Jesu  Christ 
damn  thee  in  fire  perdurable.  After  this  Judas 
was  baptized  and  was  named  Quiriacus,  and  after 
was  made  bishop  of  Jerusalem. 

When  Helena  had  the  cross  of  Jesu  Christ,  and 
saw  that  she  had  not  the  nails,  then  she  sent  to  the 
bishop  Quiriacus  that  he  should  go  to  the  place 
and  seek  the  nails.  Then  he  did  dig  in  the  earth 
so  long  that  he  found  them  shining  as  gold  ; then 
bare  he  them  to  the  queen,  and  anon  as  she  saw 
them  she  worshipped  them  with  great  reverence. 
Then  gave  S.  Helena  a part  of  the  cross  to  her 
son  and  that  other  part  she  left  in  Jerusalem,  closed 
in  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones.  And  her  son 
bare  the  nails  to  the  emperor,  and  the  emperor  did 
do  set  them  in  his  bridle  and  in  his  helm  when  he 
went  to  battle.  This  rehearseth  Eusebius,  which 
was  bishop  of  Caesarea,  how  be  it  that  others  say 
otherwise. 

Now  it  happed  that  Julian  the  apostate  did  do 
slay  Quiriacus,  that  was  bishop  of  Jerusalem, 
because  he  had  found  the  cross,  for  he  hated  it  so 
much  that  wheresomever  he  found  the  cross  he  did 
it  to  be  destroyed.  For  when  he  went  in  battle 
against  them  of  Persia,  he  sent  and  commanded 
Quiriacus  to  make  sacrifice  to  the  idols,  and  when 
he  would  not  do  it,  he  did  do  smite  off  his  right 
hand,  and  said  : With  this  hand  hast  thou  written 
many  letters  by  which  thou  repelled  much  folk 
from  doing  sacrifice  to  our  gods.  Quiriacus  said  : 
Thou  wood  hound,  thou  hast  done  to  me  great 
profit,  for  thou  hast  cut  off  the  hand  with  which  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


175 


have  many  times  written  to  the  synagogues  that  The 
they  should  not  believe  in  Jesu  Christ,  and  now  Inven- 
sith  I am  Christian  thou  hast  taken  from  me  that  tion  of 
which  noyed  me.  Then  did  Julian  do  melt  lead,  Qross°*y 
and  cast  it  in  his  mouth,  and  after  did  do  bring  a 
bed  of  iron  and  made  Quiriacus  to  be  laid  and 
stretched  thereon,  and  after  laid  under  burning  coals 
and  threw  therein  grease  and  salt  for  to  torment  him 
the  more ; and  when  Quiriacus  moved  not,  Julian 
the  emperor  said  to  him  : Either  thou  shalt  sacri- 
fice to  our  gods,  or  thou  shalt  say  at  the  least  thou 
art  not  Christian.  Apd  when  he  saw  he  would  do 
never  neither,  he  did  do  make  a deep  pit  full  of 
serpents  and  venomous  beasts*  and  cast  him  therein. 

And  when  he  entered,  anon  the  serpents  were  all 
dead.  Then  Julian  put  him  in  a caldron  of  boiling 
oil,  and  when  he  should  enter  into  it  he  blessed  it, 
and  said : Fair  Lord,  turn  this  bath  to  baptism  of 
martyrdom.  Then  was  Julian  much  angry,  and 
commanded  that  he  should  be  riven  through  his 
heart  with  a sword,  and  in  this  manner  finished 
his  life. 

The  virtue  of  the  cross  is  declared  to  us  by 
many  miracles ; for  it  happed  on  a time  that  one 
enchanter  had  deceived  a notary  and  brought  him 
into  a place  where  he  had  assembled  a great  com- 
pany of  devils,  and  promised  to  him  that  he  would 
make  him  to  have  much  riches  ; and  when  he  came 
there  he  saw  one  person  black,  sitting  on  a great 
chair,  and  all  about  him  all  full  of  horrible  people 
and  black  which  had  spears  and  swords.  Then 
demanded  this  great  devil  of  the  enchanter  who 
was  that  clerk.  The  enchanter  said  to  him  : Sir, 
he  is  ours.  Then  said  the  devil  to  him : If  thou 
wilt  worship  me  and  be  my  servant  and  reny  Jesu 
Christ,  thou  shalt  sit  on  my  right  side.  The  clerk 

VOL.  hi.  m 


Digitized  by 


Google 


176 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  anon  blessed  him  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and 
History  of  said  that  he  was  the  servant  of  Jesu  Christ  his 
Saviour,  and  anon,  as  he  had  made  the  cross,  that 
t gtfa  great  multitude  of  devils  vanished  away.  It 
happed  that  this  notary,  after  this,  on  a time  entered 
with  his  lord  into  the  church  of  S.  Sophia  and 
kneeled  down  on  his  knees  tofore  the  image  of  the 
crucifix,  the  which  crucifix,  as  it  seemed,  looked 
much  openly  and  sharply  on  him.  Then  his  lord 
made  him  to  go  apart  on  another  side,  and  always 
the  crucifix  turned  his  eyes  towards  him  ; then  he 
made  him  go  on  the  left  side,  and  yet  the  crucifix 
looked  on  him ; then  was  the  lord  much  amarvelled, 
and  charged  him  and  commanded  him  that  he 
should  tell  him  whereof  he  had  so  deserved  that 
the  crucifix  so  beheld  and  looked  on  him.  Then 
said  the  notary  that  he  could  not  remember  him 
of  no  good  thing  that  he  had  done,  save  that  one 
time  he  would  not  reny  ne  forsake  the  crucifix 
tofore  the  devil.  Then  let  us  so  bless  us  with  the 
sign  of  the  blessed  cross  that  we  may  thereby  be 
kept  from  the  power  of  our  ghostly  and  deadly 
enemy  the  devil,  and  by  the  merits  of  the  glorious 
passion  that  our  Saviour  Jesu  Christ  suffered  on  the 
cross,  after  this  life  we  may  come  to  his  everlasting 
bliss.  Amen. 


Here  followed  the  History  of  S.  John  Port  Latin . 

When  S.  John  the  apostle  and  evangelist 
preached  in  a city  of  Greece  named  Ephesus,  he 
was  taken  of  the  judge,  which  commanded  him 
that  he  should  make  sacrifice  to  the  false  idols,  and 
when  he  would  not  do  it  he  put  him  in  prison. 
And  after,  he  sent  a letter  to  Domitian  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


177 


emperor  which  said  that  he  held  an  enchanter  in  The 
prison  which  had  despised  their  gods  and  wor- 
shipped  him  that  was  crucified.  Then  commanded  Port 
Domitian  that  he  should  be  brought  to  Rome,  and  Latin 
when  he  was  there  they  did  do  shave  off  all  the 
hair 8 of  his  head  in  derision,  and  after,  they 
brought  him  tofbre  the  gate  called  Port  Latin,  and 
put  him  in  a ton  full  of  burning  oil.  But  he  never 
felt  harm  ne  pain,  and  without  suffering  any  harm 
he  issued  out.  In  that  place  Christian  men  did  do 
make  a fair  church,  and  this  day  made  a solemn 
feast,  as  it  were  the  day  of  his  martyrdom.  And 
when  the  emperor  saw  that  he  ceased  not  of 
preaching  for  the  commandment  that  he  had 
made,  he  sent  him  in  exile  into  an  isle  named 
Patmos.  It  ought  not  to  be  believed  that  the 
emperor  did  these  persecutions  unto  Christian 
people  because  they  believed  in  God,  for  they 
refused  none,  but  it  was  a displeasure  to  them  that 
they  worshipped  God  without  authority  of  the 
senators.  Another  reason  there  was,  and  that 
was  that  the  service  of  their  other  gods  was  lessed 
and  minished  thereby.  The  third  reason  was  that 
he  preached  to  despise  the  worship,  the  honour, 
and  the  avoir  of  the  world,  and  that  was  the 
thing  principal  that  the  Romans  loved.  But  Jesu 
Christ  would  no  thing  permit  it  lest  they  held  that 
it  was  done  by  puissance  human.  Another  cause 
there  was,  as  Master  John  Beleth  saith,  why  that 
the  emperor  and  the  senate  pursued  Christ  and 
his  apostles,  and  that  was  that  them  seemed  that 
God  was  over  proud  and  envious,  because  he 
deigned  not  to  have  a fellow.  Another  cause 
allegeth  Orosius,  and  saith  that  the  senate  had  de- 
spite of  this,  that  Pilate  had  written  the  miracles 
of  Jesu  Christ  to  the  emperor  only,  and  not  to  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Gordian 


178  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

senators,  wherefore  they  would  not  accord  that  he 
should  be  admitted  to  be  worshipped  among  the 
gods.  Therefore  Tiberius  the  emperor  did  do 
slay  some  of  the  senators  and  6ome  he  sent  in  exile. 
The  mother  of  S.  John  hearing  that  her  son  was 
prisoner,  moved  with  motherly  compassion,  came 
to  Rome ; and  when  she  came  she  found  that  he 
was  sent  in  exile,  she  went  then  into  the  champain 
to  a city  named  Vorulana,  and  there  died  and 
yielded  her  soul  to  Christ.  Whose  body  was 
buried  in  a cave  where  it  long  rested,  but  after, 
by  S.  James  her  other  son,  it  was  showed,  which 
then  was  taken  up  and  found  sweet  smelling,  and 
many  miracles  showed  in  her  translation  in  the 
said  city.  Then  let  us  pray  to  S.  John  that  he 
pray  for  us. 


Here  beginneth  the  Life  of  $.  Gordian . 

Gordian,  that  was  vicar  unto  Julian  the  emperor, 
constrained  a Christian  man  named  January  for  to 
do  sacrifice,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  he  was  con- 
verted by  the  preaching  of  the  same  January  unto 
the  Christian  faith,  with  his  wife  and  fifty-three 
men.  And  when  this  came  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  emperor,  he  commanded  that  January  should 
be  put  and  sent  in  exile ; and  if  so  were  that 
Gordian  would  not  do  sacrifice  to  the  gods  he 
should  be  beheaded,  and  so  his  head  was  smitten 
off  and  the  body  cast  unto  the  hounds,  which  lay 
so  by  the  space  of  seven  days  untouched.  And  at 
the  last  his  servants  took  and  stole  it  away,  and 
with  it  the  body  of  the  blessed  Epimachus,  whom 
the  said  Julian  had  slain  a little  tofore.  They 
buried  it  not  far  from  the  city  of  Rome,  about  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


179 


mile,  and  this  was  done  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  The 
three  hundred  and  sixty.  Lise#  of 

J Saints 

Nereus 
and 

Here  follow  the  Lives  of  Nereus  and  Achilleus  y Achilleus 

and frst  the  interpretation  of  their  names . 

Nereus  is  as  much  to  say  as  council  of  light. 

Or  Nereus  is  said  of  nereth,  that  is  a lantern,  and 
us,  that  is  hasting.  Or  Nereus  is  said  of  ne  and 
reus,  which  is  to  say  no  thing  guilty.  He  was 
then  council  of  light  in  preaching  of  virginity,  a 
lantern  in  honest  conversation,  hasty  in  fervour  of 
love  to  get  heaven,  and  never  guilty  in  his  con- 
science. Achilleus  is  said  of  achi,  that  is  to  say 
my  brother,  and  lesa,  that  is  health,  as  who  saith, 
the  health  of  brethren.  The  passion  of  these  twain 
wrote  Eutichius,  Victorine,  and  Maro,  servants 
of  Christ,  diligently. 

Of  the  Saints  Nereus  and  Achilleus . 

Nereus  and  Achilleus  were  gelded,  and  chamber- 
lains of  one  Domicella,  niece  of  Domiiian  the 
emperor,  whom  S.  Peter  the  apostle  baptized. 

And  this  Domicella  had  to  husband  a man  that  was 
called  Aurelian,  and  was  son  of  one  of  the  coun- 
cillors of  the  emperor.  And  when  she  was 
curiously  clad  and  arrayed  in  robes  of  purple  and 
precious  stones,  these  two  glorious  saints  preached' 
to  her  the  faith  of  Christ  and  the  virtue  of  virginity ; 
they  praised  it  much  in  showing  that  it  was  nigh 
neighbour  unto  God,  sister  untd  angels,  cousin 
unto  saints,  and  of  nature  born  with  creature 
human.  And  the  woman  that  is  married  is  subject 
to  man,  and  is  beaten  with  staves  and  fists  in  such 


/ 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


180  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  wise  that  they  be  delivered  of  their  children  ere 
their  time,  deformed  and  lame,  and  torhere  in  her 
youth  she  might  unnethe  suffer  teachings  and 

mid  admonestments  of  her  mother,  which  was  but  soft 
Achilleus  and  amiable,  she  should  now  by  the  contrary  suffer 
of  her  husband  great  shames,  reproofs,  and  villainies. 
And  she  among  all  other  things  answered  : I know 
well  that  my  father  was  jealous  over  my  mother, 
and  much  sorrow  suffered  my  mother,  and  my 
husband  shall  be  such  an  one  hereafter.  Thereto 
they  answered : When  they  be  new  wedded  they 
seem  much  debonair,  but  after,  when  they  feel 
themselves  married,  they  reign  much  cruelly,  and 
sometimes  they  make  their  maidens  mistresses 
greater  than  their  wives,  and  thus  all  holiness  may 
be  lost,  but  by  penance  may  it  be  recovered,  and 
virginity  may  not  come  again  to  his  perfection, 
how  well  that  the  culpe  of  sin  may  well  be  defaced, 
but  the  virginity  may  not  be  had  again. 

Then  this  damsel,  which  was  named  Flavia, 
believed  in  God  and  avowed  to  him  her  virginity, 
and  received  the  veil  at  the  hand  of  S.  Clement. 
And  when  her  husband  heard  this  he  gat  licence 
of  the  emperor  that  he  might  do  what  he  would 
with  his  wife,  and  also  of  them  that  had  converted 
her.  And  he  sent  them  all  three  into  an  isle 
called  Pontiana,  and  by  this  he  supposed  to  do  that 
the  foresaid  saints,  that  is  to  say  S.  Nereus  and  S. 
Achilleus,  should  turn  the  purpose  of  his  wife, 
touching  the  avow  of  the  virginity  that  she  had 
made.  And  after  that,  a little  time,  he  went  to  the 
virgin  and  also  to  the  saints,  to  the  end  that  they 
should  change  their  purpose,  and  they  in  no  wise 
would  not,  but  yet  more  strongly  than  tofore  were 
they  confirmed  and  comforted,  and  said  plainly 
they  would  in  no  wise  do,  ne  make  sacrifice  to  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  181 

idols,  for  they  had  been  baptized  of  S.  Peter  the  The 
apostle,  which  so  had  confirmed  them  in  the  law 
and  faith,  that  they  might  make  no  sacrifice  but  Nereua 
only  to  God ; and  therefore  their  heads  were  U(j 
smitten  off,  and  so  suffered  martyrdom  about  the  Achillea* 
year  of  our  Lord  four  score.  Of  whom  the  bodies 
were  buried  by  the  sepulchre  of  S.  Pernelle. 

And  the  other  saints,  that  is  to  say,  S.  Victorine, 

Eutichius,  and  Maro,  which  were  about  them  as 
servants,  were  put  to  labour  all  day  in  the  gardens, 
and  at  even  was  given  to  them  brown  bread,  black 
and  rough,  which  was  made  of  great  meal  and 
bran.  Finally  he  made  Eutichius  to  die  by  force 
of  famine  and  to  give  up  his  spirit.  He  did  do 
cast  S.  Victorine  into  foul  and  stinking  water,  and 
there  was  drowned,  and  he  made  S.  Maro  to  be 
laid  under  a stone  the  which  seventy  of  his  servants 
might  unnethe  move,  and  the  glorious  saint  cast 
the  stone  upon  his  shoulders  as  lightly  as  it  had 
been  a little  straw,  and  bare  it  two  miles  farther 
from  thence,  for  which  cause  many  were  con- 
verted and  believed  in  God,  for  which  cause  the 
master’s  councillors  did  him  to  be  slain.  And 
after  this  Aurelian  did  do  bring  the  damsel  from 
the  place  of  exile,  and  sent  to  her  two  virgins 
named  Euphrosyne  and  Theodora,  which  had  been 
nourished  with  her,  to  the  end  that  they  should  turn 
and  change  her  vow,  but  she  converted  these  two 
virgins  to  the  faith  by  her  exhortation.  Then 
Aurelian  took  the  husbands  of  the  two  maidens 
and  three  enchanters  with  him,  and  came  to 
Domicella  for  to  wed  and  accomplish  the  marriage 
by  force  against  her  will ; but  Domicella,  as  God 
would,  converted  the  young  men  to  the  faith  of 
Jesu  Christ.  But  when  Aurelian  saw  that  she  had 
converted  the  two  young  men  and  the  two  virgins 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


18  2 

The  Life  aforesaid,  he  led  her  into  his  chamber  and  made 
p the  enchanters  to  sing,  and  commanded  the  others 

aacrace  to  dance  with  him  as  he  that  would  defoul  Domi- 
cella,  but  the  jugglers  left  singing,  and  the  others 
dancing,  and  he  himself  ceased  not  to  dance  two 
day 8 continually,  unto  the  time  that  he  expired  and 
died  tofbre  them  all.  Then  Luxurius,  which  was 
his  brother,  gat  leave  to  slay  all  them  that  believed 
in  Jesu  Christ.  And  he  did  so  much  that  in  the 
place  where  they  dwelled  he  did  do  set  a fire,  and 
they,  being  in  their  prayers,  rendered  their  souls 
unto  God,  whose  bodies  S.  Caesarius,  upon  the  morn 
finding  no  thing  hurt,  buried.  Then  let  us  pray  to 
them  that  we  may  come  to  everlasting  bliss  in 
heaven.  Amen. 

Here  follonveth  of  S.  Pancrace , and first  the 
interpretation  of  his  name . 

Pancrace  is  said  of  pan,  that  is  as  much  to  say 
as  all,  and  gratus  and  citius,  which  is  as  much  to 
say  as  courteous  in  his  young  age.  Or  otherwise, 
as  it  is  said  in  the  book  called  glossanum,  pancras 
is  said  rapine,  or  pancras  is,  subject  to  beatings 
and  torments.  Pancrace  is  also  said  of  divers 
colours ; and  so  it  appeared  by  him : he  used 
rapine  in  ravishing  by  his  exhortation  the  prey  of 
caitiffs  misbelieving,  in  bringing  them  to  the  faith. 
He  was  also  subject  to  beatings  and  torments  in 
suffering  them,  also  in  divers  colours  and  full  of 
all  virtues. 

Of  S.  Pancrace . 

Pancrace  was  of  right  noble  lineage  and  was 
born  of  the  country  of  Phrygia.  When  his  father 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE,  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


183 


Mid  mother  were  dead  he  was  put  to  be  governed  The  life 
in  the  hand  of  Denis  his  uncle,  which  was  brother  S. 
of  hia  father,  and  they  both  came  to  Rome,  where  ^ancrace 
they  had  of  their  patrimony  great  rents.  In  their 
street  the  pope  Cornelius  held  him  privily,  of 
which  pope,  Pancrace  and  Denis  had  received  the 
Christian  faith.  Finally  Denis  died  in  the  country, 
and  Pancrace  was  taken  and  presented  to  Caesar. 

And  then  was  Pancrace  about  fourteen  years  of 
age.  To  whom  the  emperor  Diocletian  said: 

My  little  child,  I warn  and  counsel  thee  that  thou 
advise  thee  well,  to  the  end  that  thou  die  not  an 
evil  death,  for  as  a child  thou  art  lightly  deceived ; 
and  because  thou  art  noble  of  blood  and  of  lineage, 
and  son  of  one  my  right  dear  friend,  1 pray  thee 
that  thou  leave  this  madness  that  thou  hast  em- 
prised,  and  that  I may  have  thee  with  me  as  my 
son.  To  whom  Pancrace  answered:  If  I be  a 
child  of  body  yet  mine  heart  is  old,  and  by  the 
virtue  of  my  lord  Jesu  Christ  your  threatening  and 
menaces  make  me  no  more  to  move  than  doth  the 
painting  that  I see  upon  the  wall ; and  these  gods 
that  thou  wouldest  that  I should  worship  be  but 
deceivers  of  creatures  and  have  been  as  germains 
in  fornications  made  against  God  their  creator,  and 
have  not  spared  kin  ne  other.  And  if  thou  hadst 
knowledge  that  thy  servants  were  such,  thou 
shouldst  command  that  they  should  be  slain,  and 
I much  marvel  that  ye  adore  such  gods.  When 
the  emperor  heard  this  child  thus  speak  he  doubted 
to  be  overcome  of  him,  and  commanded  that  his 
head  should  be  smitten  off,  and  so  he  was  martyred 
about  the  year  of  our  Lord  two  hundred  and 
eighty-five,  whose  body  a worshipful  lady  named 
Cocovilla,  which  was  of  die  senate,  with  great 
diligence  buried  honorably.  And  of  him  said 


Digitized  by 


Google 


184 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  Gregory  of  Tours,  doctor : That  if  there  be  a man 
IT°j^  that  will  make  a false  oath  in  the  place  of  his 
r sepulchre,  tofore  or  he  come  to  the  chancel  of  the 
quire  he  shall  be  travailed  with  an  evil  spirit  and 
out  of  his  mind,  or  he  shall  fall  on  the  pavement 
all  dead. 

It  happed  on  a time  that  there  was  a great 
altercation  between  two  men,  and  the  judge  wist 
not  who  had  wrong.  And  for  the  jealousy  of 
justice  that  he  had,  he  brought  them  both  unto  the 
altar  of  S.  Peter  for  to  swear,  praying  the  apostle 
that  he  would  declare  who  had  right.  And  when 
he  that  had  wrong  had  sworn  and  had  none  harm, 
the  judge,  that  knew  the  malice  of  him,  said  all  on 
high  : This  old  Peter  here  is  either  over  merciful 
or  he  is  propitious  to  this  young  man,  but  let  us  go 
to  Pancrace  and  demand  we  of  him  the  truth  ; and 
when  they  came  to  the  sepulchre,  he  that  was 
culpable  sware,  and  stretched  forth  his  hand,  but 
he  might  not  withdraw  his  hand  again  to  him,  and 
anon  after  he  died  there,  and  therefore  unto  this 
day  of  much  people  it  is  used  that  for  great  and 
notable  causes  men  make  their  oaths  upon  the  relics 
of  S.  Pancrace. 


Here  follow cth  of  S . Urban,  and first  of  the 
interpretation  of  his  name . 

Urbanus  is  said  of  urbanity,  that  is  courtesy,  or 
It  is  said  of  ur,  that  is  to  say  fire  or  light  and  banal, 
that  is  to  say  response  or  answer.  He  was  light 
by  honest  conversation,  fire  by  charity,  and  answer 
by  doctrine.  Or  he  was  light,  for  the  light  is 
good  to  behold,  and  it  is  immaterial  in  essenoe,  in 
setting  celestial,  and  profitable  in  working.  And 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


185 


thus  this  saint  was  amiable  in  conversation,  celestial  The  Life 
in  love  of  God,  and  profitable  in  predication. 

Of  S.  Urban . 

S.  Urban  was  pope  after  S.  Calixtus,  and  the 
Christian  people  were  in  his  time  in  over  great 
persecution,  but  the  mother  of  the  emperor,  whom 
Origen  had  converted,  prayed  so  much  her  son 
that  he  left  the  Christian  people  in  peace.  Never- 
theless there  was  one,  Almachius,  provost  of 
Rome,  and  was  their  principal  governour  of  the 
city,  and  he  had  cruelly  smitten  off  the  head  of  S. 

Cecilia.  This  man  was  marvellously  cruel  against 
Christian  men,  and  did  diligently  enquire  where  S. 

Urban  was,  and  by  one  of  his  servants,  named  Car- 
pasius,  he  was  found  in  a dark  place  and  a secret  with 
three  priests  and  three  deacons.  He  commanded 
to  put  him  in  prison,  and  after,  he  did  him  to  be 
brought  tofore  him  and  accused  him  that  he  had 
deceived  five  thousand  people  with  S.  Cecilia,  and 
the  noble  men  Tiburtius  and  Valerian,  and  made 
all  them  do  sacrilege,  and  above  this  he  demanded 
him  the  treasure  of  S.  Cecilia  and  of  the  church. 

To  whom  Urban  said:  I see  now  that  covetise 
moveth  thee  more  to  persecute  the  Christian  men 
than  doth  the  sacrifice  of  thy  gods ; the  treasure  of 
S.  Cecilia  is  ascended  into  heaven  by  the  hands  of 
poor  people.  Then  did  he  do  beat  S.  Urban  with 
plummets  and  also  his  fellows  with  him,  and  he 
praised  the  name  of  god  Elyon,  and  the  tyrant 
smiling  said : This  old  fellow  would  be  reputed 
wise,  for  he  speaketh  and  saith  words  that  he 
understandeth  not.  And  when  he  saw  that  he 
might  not  overcome  him,  he  commanded  him  and 
sent  him  to  prison  again,  whereas  S.  Urban  con- 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


1 86 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  verted  three  captains  of  the  town  with  the  keeper 

PeraeU*  P1*800’  wa8  named  Anolinus,  and 

c baptized  them.  When  the  tyrant  heard  that 
Anolinus  was  become  Christian,  he  did  do  bring  him 
tofore  him,  and  because  he  would  do  no  sacrifice  to 
his  gods  he  did  do  amite  off  his  head.  And  when 
S.  Urban  and  his  fellows  were  brought  tofore  the 
idols,  to  the  end  that  they  should  sacrifice  and  cense 
tofore  the  gods,  S.  Urban  began  to  make  his  orison 
to  God ; and  anon  the  idol  fell  down  and  slew 
twenty-two  priests  of  the  law  that  held  fire  for  to 
make  sacrifice.  Then  were  they  beaten  cruelly, 
and  after  brought  for  to  make  sacrifice,  and  then 
they  spit  in  the  idol  and  after  made  the  sign  of  the 
cross  in  their  foreheads,  and  kissed  each  other,  and 
received  capital  sentence,  that  is  to  say  they  were 
beheaded,  and  so  suffered  death  under  Alexander 
the  emperor,  which  began  to  reigri  the  year  of  our 
Lord  two  hundred  and  twenty.  And  anon  after 
Carpasius  was  taken  of  the  fiend  in  blaspheming 
his  gods  and  in  magnifying  the  Christian  men 
against  his  will,  he  was  strangled  of  the  fiend, 
which  thing  his  wife  seeing,  called  Armenia,  with 
her  daughter  Lucina  and  all  her  household  received 
baptism  of  S.  Fortunatus,  priest.  And  after  that 
the  bodies  of  the  saints  were  right  honorably 
buried. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S.  Pernelle , and  frst 
the  interpretation  of  her  name . 

Petronilla  is  said  of  petens,  that  is  demanding, 
and  of  tronus,  that  is  a throne  or  a seat,  as  who 
saith  she  was  demanding  the  throne  or  seat  of 
virgins. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  187 


Of  S,  Pemellc. 

S.  Pernellc,  whose  life  S.  Marcel  writeth,  was 
daughter  of  S.  Peter  the  apostle,  which  was  right 
fair  and  beauteous,  and  by  the  will  of  her  father  she 
was  vexed  with  the  fevers  and  axes.  It  happed  on 
a time  that  the  disciples  dined  with  S.  Peter,  and 
one,  Titus,  said  to  him  : Peter,  how  is  it  that  all 
sick  people  be  healed  of  thee  and  thou  sufferest 
Pernelle,  thy  daughter,  to  lie  sick  ? To  whom  8. 
Peter  said : For  it  is  expedient  to  her  to  be  sick ; 
nevertheless  because  it  shall  not  be  imputed  im- 
possibility of  her  health  for  to  be  excused  by  my 
words,  he  said  to  her : Arise,  Pernelle,  hastily, 
and  serve  us ; which  anon  arose  all  whole  and 
ministered  and  served  them.  And  when  the 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Pernelle 


service  was  all  done  and  complished,  Peter  said 
to  her  : Pernelle,  go  again  to  thy  bed  5 who  anon 
went  again  to  her  bed,  and  the  fevers  vexed  her  as 
they  did  tofore,  and  whereas  she  began  to  be 
perfect  in  the  love  of  God  so  he  healed  her 
perfectly.  Then  was  there  an  earl  called  Flaccus 
which  came  to  her,  and  for  her  beauty  would  have 
her  unto  his  wife.  To  whom  she  answered:  If 


thou  desirest  me  to  have  unto  thy  wife,  command 
thou  certain  virgins  to  come  to  me  for  to  accom- 
pany me  unto  thine  house.  And  whiles  he  was 
busy  to  make  ready  the  said  maidens,  S.  Pernelle 
set  herself  in  fastings  and  prayers,  and  received  the 
holy  body  of  our  Lord  and  reclined  in  to  her  bed, 
and  after  the  third  day  she  died,  and  she  passed 
out  of  this  world  rendering  her  soul  unto  our  Lord. 
Then  Flaccus,  seeing  himself  disappointed  and 
mocked,  turned  himself  unto  Felicula,  fellow  of 


S.  Pernelle,  and  said  that  she  should  wed  him  or 
offer  unto  the  idols,  which  both  two  she  refused. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Dunstan 


iSS  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Then  the  prefect  set  her  in  prison  and  there 
kept  her  seven  days  and  seven  nights  without 
meat  and  drink,  and  after  he  did  do  hang  her  body 
on  a gibbet,  and  there  slew  heT  and  threw  her 
body  into  a foul  privy,  which  holy  Nicodemus 
took  up  and  buried.  Wherefore  Nicodemus  was 
called  of  Flaccus,  and  because  he  would  not  sacri- 
fice to  the  idols  he  was  beaten  with  plummets  and 
his  body  cast  into  the  Tiber,  but  it  was  taken  up  of 
Justin  his  clerk  and  honorably  buried. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S,  Dunstan . 

S.  Dunstan  was  born  in  England,  and  our  Lord 
showed  miracles  for  him  ere  he  was  born.  It  was 
so  that  on  a Candlemas  day,  as  all  the  people  were 
in  the  church  with  tapers  in  their  hands,  suddenly 
all  the  lights  in  the  church  were  quenched  at  once, 
save  only  the  taper  which  S.  Dunstan’s  mother 
bare,  for  that  burned  still  fair*  Whereof  all  the 
people  marvelled  greatly ; howbeit  her  taper  was 
out,  but  by  the  power  of  our  Lord  it  lighted  again 
by  itself,  and  burned  full  bright,  so  that  all  the  others 
came  and  lighted  their  tapers  at  the  taper  of  S. 
Dunstan’s  mother.  Wherefore  all  the  people  gave 
laud  and  thankings  unto  our  Lord  God  for  this 
great  miracle.  And  then  there  was  a holy  man 
that  said  that  the  child  that  she  then  bare  should 
give  light  to  all  England  by  his  holy  living. 

This  holy  child  Dunstan  was  born  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  nine  hundred  and  twenty-five,  that 
time  reigning  in  this  land  king  Athelstan.  And 
S.  Dunstan’s  father  hight  Herston,  and  his  mother 
hight  Quendred,  and  they  set  their  son  Dunstan  to 
school  in  the  abbey  of  Glastonbury,  whereafter  he 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  189 

was  abbot  for  his  holy  living.  And  within  a short  The  Life 
time  after  he  went  to  his  uncle  Ethelwold,  that  of  S. 
then  was  bishop  of  Canterbury,  to  whom  he  was  ^unstan 
welcome  and  was  glad  of  his  conversation  of  holy 
living.  And  then  he  brought  him  to  King  Athel- 
s tan,  the  which  made  full  much  of  him  also  for 
his  good  living,  and  then  he  was  made  abbot  of 
Glastonbury  by  consent  of  the  king  and  his  brother 
Edmond,  and  in  that  place  ruled  full  well  and 
religiously  the  monks  his  brethren,  and  drew  them 
to  holy  living  by  good  ensample . giving.  S. 

Dunstan  and  S.  Ethelwold  were  both  made  priests 
in  one  day,  and  he  was  holy  in  contemplation.  And 
whenso  was  that  S.  Dunstan  was  weary  of  prayer, 
then  used  he  to  work  in  goldsmith’s  work  with 
his  own  hands  for  to  eschew  idleness,  and  he  gave 
alway  alms  to  poor  people  for  the  love  of  God. 

And  on  a time  as  he  sat  at  his  work  his  heart 
was  on  Jesu  Christ,  his  mouth  occupied  with  holy 
prayers,  and  his  hands  busy  on  his  work.  But 
the  devil,  which  ever  had  great  envy  at  him,  came 
to  him  in  an  eventide  in  the  likeness  of  a woman, 
as  he  was  busy  to  make  a chalice,  and  with  smiling 
said  that  she  had  great  things  to  tell  him,  and  then 
he  bade  her  say  what  she  would,  and  then  she 
began  to  tell  him  many  nice  trifles,  and  no  manner 
virtue  therein,  and  then  he  supposed  that  she  was 
a wicked  spirit,  and  anon  caught  her  by  the  nose 
with  a pair  of  tongs  of  iron,  burning  hot,  and  then 
the  devil  began  to  roar  and  cry,  and  fast  drew 
away,  but  S.  Dunstan  held  fast  till  it  was  far 
within  the  night,  and  then  let  her  go,  and  the 
fiend  departed  with  a horrible  noise  and  cry,  and 
said,  that  all  the  people  might  hear  : Alas ! what 
shame  hath  this  carle  done  to  me,  how  may  I best 
quit  him  again  ? But  never  after  the  devil  had  lust 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


190 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  to  tempt  him  in  that  craft.  And  in  short  time 
ofS.  after  died  king  Athelstan,  and  Edmond  bis 
Uun#tan  brother  reigned  king  after  him,  to  whom  S. 
Dunstan  was  chief  of  counsel,  for  he  gave  to  him 
right  good  counsel  to  his  life’s  end  ; and  then  died 
Edmond  the  king,  and  after  him  reigned  his  son 
Edwin,  and  soon  after  S.  Dunstan  and  he  fell 
at  strife  for  his  sinful  living.  For  S.  Dunstan 
rebuked  the  king  sharply  therefor,  but  there  was 
none  amendment,  but  always  worse  and  worse. 
Wherefore  S.  Dunstan  was  right  sorry,  and  did 
all  that  pain  he  might  to  bring  the  king  to  amend- 
ment, but  it  would  not  be.  But  the  king,  within 
a while  after,  exiled  S.  Dunstan  out  of  this  land, 
and  then  he  sailed  over  the  sea  and  came  to  the 
abbey  of  S.  Amand  in  France,  and  there  he 
dwelled  long  time  in  full  holy  life  till  king  Edwin 
was  dead.  And  after  him  reigned  Edgar  king,  a 
full  holy  man.  And  then  he  heard  of  the  holiness 
of  S.  Dunstan,  and  sent  for  him  to  be  of  his  council, 
and  received  him  with  great  reverence,  and  made 
him  again  abbot  of  Glastonbury.  And  soon  after 
the  bishop  of  Worcester  died,  and  then  S.  Dunstan 
was  made  bishop  there  by  the  will  of  king  Edgar. 
And  within  a little  while  after  the  see  of  London 
was  void,  to  which  king  Edgar  promoted  S. 
Dunstan  also,  and  so  he  held  both  bishoprics  in 
his  hand,  that  is  to  wit  both  the  bishopric  of 
Worcester  and  the  bishopric  of  London.  And 
after  this  died  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and 
then  king  Edgar  made  S.  Dunstan  archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  which  he  guided  well  and  holily  to 
the  pleasure  of  God,  so  that  in  that  time  of  king 
Edgar,  and  Dunstan  archbishop,  was  joy  and 
mirth  through  the  realm  of  England,  and  every 
man  praised  greatly  S.  Dunstan  for  his  holy  life. 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


191 

good  rule,  and  guiding.  And  in  divers  places,  The  Life 
whereas  he  visited  and  saw  curates  that  were  not  S. 
good,  ne  propice  for  the  weal  of  the  souls  that  Dunstan 
they  had  cure  of,  he  would  discharge  them  and 
put  them  out  of  their  benefices,  and  set  in  such  as 
would  entend  and  were  good  men,  as  ye  shall  find 
more  plainly  of  this  matter  in  the  life  of  S.  Oswald. 

And  on  a time  as  he  sat  at  a prince’s  table,  he 
looked  up  and  saw  his  father  and  mother  above 
in  heaven,  and  then  he  thanked  our  Lord  God  of 
his  great  mercy  and  goodness  that  it  pleased  him 
to  show  him  that  sight.  And  another  time  as  he 
lay  in  his  bed  he  saw  the  brightness  of  heaven, 
and  heard  angels  singing  Kyrie  eleison  after  the 
note  of  Kyrie  rex  splendens,  which  was  to  him  a 
full  great  comfort.  And  another  time  he  was  in 
his  meditations,  he  had  hanging  on  the  wall  in  his 
chamber  an  harp,  on  which  otherwhile  he  would 
harp  anthems  of  our  Lady,  and  of  other  saints,  and 
holy  hymns,  and  it  was  so  that  the  harp  sounded 
full  melodiously  without  touching  of  any  hand  that 
he  could  see,  this  anthem  was,  Gaudent  in  celis 
animae  sanctorum,  wherein  this  holy  saint  Dunstan 
had  great  joy.  He  had  a special  grace  of  our 
Lord  that  such  heavenly  joys  and  things  were 
showed  to  him  in  this  wretched  world  for  his 
great  comfort.  And  after  this  he  became  all  sick 
and  feeble,  and  upon  holy  Thursday  he  sent  for 
all  his  brethren  and  asked  of  them  forgiveness,  and 
also  forgave  them  all  trespasses  and  assoiled  them 
of  all  their  sins,  and  the  third  day  after  he  passed 
out  of  this  world  to  God,  full  of  virtues,  the  year 
of  our  Lord  nine  hundred  and  eighty-eight.  And 
his  soul  was  borne  up  to  heaven  with  merry  song 
of  angels,  all  the  people  hearing  that  were  at  his 
death.  And  his  body  lieth  at  Canterbury  in  a 

VOL.  III.  N 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


192 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  worshipful  shrine,  whereas  our  Lord  showeth  for 
of  S.  hi8  servant  S.  Dunstan  many  fair  and  great 
Alanelm  m;rac]e8>  wherefore  our  Lord  be  praised,  world 
without  end.  Amen. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S . Aldhelm • 

S.  Aldhelm  the  confessor  was  born  in  England. 
His  father  hight  Kenton ; he  was  brother  unto 
Ina,  king  of  this  land,  and  when  king  Ina  was 
dead,  Kenton  was  made  king  after  him,  and  then 
this  holy  child  Aldhelm  was  set  to  school  in  the 
house  of  Malmesbury,  where  afterward  he  was 
made  abbot.  And  then  he  did  there  great  cost 
in  building  and  did  do  make  there  a full  royal 
abbey.  And  when  the  pope  heard  of  his  great 
holiness,  he  sent  for  him  to  come  to  Rome,  and 
when  he  was  there  the  pope  welcomed  him  and 
was  much  glad  of  his  good  living,  and  there  he 
abode  long  time  with  the  pope,  and  gat  full  great 
privileges  and  liberties  to  the  house  of  Malmesbury, 
in  such  wise  that  no  bishop  in  England  should  visit 
ne  have  to  do  there,  ne  the  king  to  let  them  of 
their  free  election,  but  chose  their  abbot  among 
the  convent  themselves.  And  when  he  had  gotten 
all  this  of  the  pope  he  was  full  glad  and  joyful, 
and  lived  there  holily  a long  time.  And  on  a 
day  he  said  mass  in  the  church  of  S.  John 
Lateran,  and  when  mass  was  done,  there  was  no 
man  that  would  take  his  chasuble  from  him  at  the 
end  of  the  mass,  and  then  he  saw  the  sunbeam 
shine  through  the  glass  window,  and  hung  his 
chasuble  thereon,  whereof  all  the  people  marvelled 
greatly  of  that  miracle,  and  the  same  chasuble  is 
yet  at  Malmesbury,  die  colour  thereof  is  purple. 


,y  Google 


193 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

And  within  short  time  after,  he  came  again  into  The  Life 
England,  and  brought  with  him  many  privileges  jjj. 
under  the  pope’s  seal,  which  after,  king  Ina  con-  1111611111 
firmed  all  that  the  pope  had  granted  to  the  house 
of  Malmesbury.  This  , was  about  the  year  of  our 
Lord  seven  hundred  and  six.  And  that  time 
there  fell  a great  variance  among  the  bishops  of 
this  land  for  the  holding  of  Easter  day,  but  S. 

Aldhelm  made  a book  that  all  men  should  know 
for  ever  when  Easter  day  should  fall,  the  which 
book  is  yet  at  Malmesbury.  And  that  abbey  he 
did  do  make  in  the  worship  of  our  blessed  Lady. 

And  Brightwold  that  was  archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury heard  of  Aldhelm’s  holy  living,  and  he  sent 
for  him  to  be  his  chancellor,  and  they  lived 
together  full  holily  long  time,  and  each  was  full 
glad  and  joyful  of  the  other. 

And  on  a day  as  they  stood  at  the  seaside  by 
Dover  Castle,  they  saw  a ship  laden  with  mer- 
chandise not  far  from  them,  and  S.  Aldhelm 
called  to  them  to  wit  if  they  had  any  ornaments 
longing  to  holy  church  within  their  ship  to  sell. 

But  the  merchants  had  disdain  of  him,  and  thought 
he  was  not  of  power  to  buy  such  things  as  they 
had  to  sell,  and  departed  from  the  holy  man. 

But  anon  fell  on  them-  so  great  a tempest  that  they 
were  in  peril  for  to  perish,  and  then  one  of  them 
said : We  suffer  this  trouble  because  we  had  disdain 
of  the  words  of  yonder  holy  man,  and  therefore 
let  us  all  meekly  desire  him  to  pray  for  us  tp  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ.  They  did  so,  and  anon  the 
tempest  ceased,  and  then  they  came  to  this  holy 
man  and  brought  to  him  a full  fair  Bible,  the 
which  is  yet  at  Malmesbury  unto  this  day.  And 
four  years  before  his  death  he  was  made  bishop  of 
Dorset  by  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  by 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


194 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  other  bishops,  but  within  short  time  after  he  died, 
Life  of  an(i  Heth  buried  at  Malmesbury  thereas  he  was 
^nstm  abbot.  And  after  that  S.  Egewin  came  to  offer 
at  his  tomb,  fettered  with  chains  of  iron  fast 
locked,  and  from  thence  he  went  so  to  Rome  to 
the  pope,  alway  wearing  those  fetters  which  was 
to  him  great  pain,  God  reward  him  his  meed. 
And  S.  Aldhelm,  ere  he  died,  cursed  all  them 
that  did  any  wrong  in  breaking  ot  the  privileges 
of  the  said  abbey  of  Malmesbury,  and  them  that 
help  the  house  to  maintain  God's  service  shall 
have  God's  blessing  and  his.  And  when  he  had 
lain  long  in  the  earth  he  was  translated,  and  laid 
in  a full  rich  shrine,  whereas  our  Lord  showeth 
daily  for  his  holy  servant  many  fair  miracles. 
Then  let  us  pray  S.  Aldhelm  to  pray  for  us  unto 
our  Lord  God,  that  we  may  in  this  wretched  vale 
of  this  world  so  bewail  our  sins  and  amend  our 
living  that  we  may  come  to  everlasting  life  in 
heaven.  Amen. 


Of  S . Austin  that  brought  Christendom  to  England \ 

S.  Austin  was  a holy  monk  and  sent  in  to  Eng- 
land, to  preach  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ, 
by  S.  Gregory,  then  being  pope  of  Rome.  The 
which  had  a great  zeal  and  love  unto  England, 
as  is  rehearsed  all  along  in  his  legend,  how  that 
he  saw  children  of  England  in  the  market  of  Rome 
for  to  be  sold,  which  were  fair  of  visage,  for  which 
cause  he  demanded  licence  and  obtained  to  go  into 
England  for  to  convert  the  people  thereof  to 
Christian  faith.  And  he  being  on  the  way  the 
pope  died  and  he  was  chosen  pope,  and  was 
countermanded  and  came  again  to  Rome.  And 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


195 


after,  when  he  wa6  sacred  into  the  papacy,  he  The 
remembered  the  realm  of  England,  and  sent  S.  Life  of 
Austin,  as  head  and  chief,  and  other  holy  monks  ^ns^n 
and  priests  with  him,  to  the  number  of  forty 
persons,  unto  the  realm  of  England.  And  as 
they  came  toward  England  they  came  in  the  pro- 
vince of  Anjou,  purposing  to  have  rested  all 
night  at  a place  called  Pounte,  say  a mile  from 
the  city  and  river  of  Ligerim,  but  the  women 
scorned  and  were  so  noyous  to  them  that  they 
drove  them  out  of  the  town,  and  they  came  unto 
a fair  broad  elm,  and  purposed  to  have  rested 
there  that  night,  but  one  of  the  women  which 
was  more  cruel  than  the  other  purposed  to  drive 
them  thence,  and  came  so  nigh  them  that  they 
might  not  rest  there  that  night.  And  then  S. 

Austin  took  his  staff  for  to  remove  from  that 
place,  and  suddenly  his  staff  sprang  out  of  his 
hand  with  a great  violence,  the  space  of  three 
furlongs  thence,  and  there  sticked  fast  in  the  earth. 

And  when  S.  Austin  came  to  his  staff  and  pulled 
it  out  of  the  earth,  incontinent  by  the  might  of 
our  Lord,  sourded  and  sprang  there  a fair  well 
or  fountain  of  clear  water  which  refreshed  him 
well  and  all  his  fellowship.  And  about  that  well 
they  rested  all  that  night,  and  they  that  dwelled 
thereby  saw  all  that  night  over  that  place  a great 
light  coming  from  heaven  which  covered  all  that 
place  where  these  holy  men  lay.  And  on  the 
morn  S.  Austin  wrote  in  the  earth  with  his  staff 
beside  the  well  these  words  following : Here  had 
Austin,  the  servant  of  the  servants  of  God,  hospi- 
tality, whom  S.  Gregory  the  pope  hath  sent  to 
convert  England. 

On  the  morn  when  the  holy  men  were  de- 
parted, the  dwellers  of  the  coasts  thereby  which 


Digitized  by  vjOOQlC 


196  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  saw  the  light  in  the  night  tofore,  came  thither 
Life  of  and  found  there  a fair  well,  of  the  which  they 
S.  Austin  marvelled  greatly.  And  when  they  saw  the  scrip- 
ture written  in  the  earth  then  they  were  greatly 
abashed  because  of  their  unkindness,  and  repented 
them  full  sore  of  that  they  had  mocked  them  the 
day  before.  And  after,  they  edified  there  a fair 
church  in  the  same  place  in  the  worship  of  S. 
Austin,  the  which  the  bishop  of  Anjou  hallowed. 
And  to  the  hallowing  thereof  came  so  great  multi- 
tude of  people  that  they  trod  the  com  in  the  fields 
down  all  plain,  like  unto  a floor  clean  swept,  for 
there  was  no  sparing  of  it.  Notwithstanding,  at 
the  time  of  reaping,  that  ground  so  trodden  bare 
more  com  and  better  than  any  other  fields  beside, 
not  trodden,  did.  And  the  high  altar  of  that 
church  standeth  over  the  place  where  S.  Austin 
wrote  with  his  staff  by  the  well,  and  yet  unto  this 
day  may  no  woman  come  in  to  that  church.  But 
there  was  a noble  woman  that  said  that  she  was 
not  guilty  in  offending  S.  Austin,  and  took  a taper 
in  her  hand  and  went  for  to  offer  it  in  the  said 
church  5 but  the  sentence  of  almighty  God  may 
not  be  revoked,  for  as  soon  as  she  entered  the 
church  her  bowels  and  sinews  began  to  shrink 
and  she  fell  down  dead  in  ensample  of  all  other 
women  ; whereby  we  may  understand  that  injury 
done  against  a saint  displeaseth  greatly  almighty 
God. 

And  from  thence  S.  Austin  and  his  fellowship 
came  into  England  and  arrived  in  the  isle  of 
Thanet  in  East  Kent,  and  king  Ethelbert  reigned 
that  time  in  Kent,  which  was  a noble  man  and  a 
mighty.  To  whom  S.  Austin  sent,  showing  the 
intent  of  his  coming  from  the  court  of  Rome,  and 
said  that  he  had  brought  to  him  right  joyful  and 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


197 


pleasant  tidings,  and  said  that  if  he  would  obey  The 
and  do  after  his  preaching  that  he  should  have  . 

everlasting  joy  in  the  bliss  of  heaven,  and  should  Aus  m 
reign  with  almighty  God  in  his  kingdom.  And 
then  king  Ethelbert  hearing  this,  commanded 
that  they  should  abide  and  tarry  in  the  same  isle, 
and  that  all  things  should  be  ministered  to  them 
that  were  necessary,  unto  the  time  that  he  were 
otherwise  advised.  And  soon  after,  the  king  came 
to  them  in  the  same  isle,  and  he  being  in  the  field, 

S.  Austin  with  his  fellowship  came  and  spake  with 
him,  having  tofore  them  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
singing  by  the  way  the  litany,  beseeching  God 
devoutly  to  strengthen  them  and  help.  And  the 
king  received  him  and  his  fellowship,  and  in  the 
same  place  S.  Austin  preached  a glorious  sermon, 
and  declared  to  the  king  the  Christian  faith  openly 
and  the  great  merit  and  avail  that  should  come 
thereof  in  time  coming.  And  when  he  had  ended 
his  sermon  the  king  said  to  him : Your  promises 
be  full  fair  that  ye  bring,  but  because  they  be  new 
and  have  not  been  heard  here  before,  we  may 
not  yet  give  consent  thereto  ; nevertheless,  because 
ye  be  come  as  pilgrims  from  far  countries,  we  will 
not  be  grievous  ne  hard  to  you,  but  we  will  receive 
you  meekly  and  minister  to  you  such  things  as  be 
necessary,  neither  we  will  forbid  you,  but  as  many 
as  ye  can  convert  to  your  faith  and  religion  by 
your  preaching  ye  shall  have  licence  to  baptize 
them,  and  to  accompany  them  to  your  law.  And 
then  the  king  gave  to  them  a mansion  in  the  city 
of  Dorobernence,  which  now  is  called  Canterbury. 

And  when  they  drew  nigh  the  city  they  came  in 
with  a cross  of  silver,  and  with  procession  singing 
the  litany,  praying  almighty  God  erf*  succour  and 
help  that  he  would  take  away  his  wrath  from  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


198 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  city  and  to  inflame  the  hearts  of  the  people  to 
receive  his  doctrine.  And  then  S.  Austin  and 
5.  Austin  fellowship  began  to  preach  there  the  word 
of  God,  and  about  there  in  the  province,  and  such 
people  as  were  well  disposed  anon  were  con- 
verted, and  followed  this  holy  man.  And  by  the 
holy  conversation  and  miracles  that  they  did  much 
people  were  converted  and  great  fame  arose  in 
the  country.  And  when  it  came  to  the  king’s 
ear,  anon  he  came  to  the  presence  of  S.  Austin 
and  desired  him  to  preach  again,  and  then  the 
word  of  God  so  inflamed  him,  that  incontinent, 
as  soon  as  the  sermon  was  ended,  the  king  fell 
down  to  the  feet  of  S.  Austin  and  said  sorrow- 
fully: Alas!  woe  is  me,  that  I have  erred  so 
long  and  know  not  of  him  that  thou  speakest  of, 
thy  promises  be  so  delectable  that  I think  it  all 
too  long  till  I be  christened,  wherefore,  holy 
father,  I require  thee  to  minister  to  me  the  sacra- 
ment of  baptism.  And  then  S.  Austin,  seeing  the 
great  meekness  and  obedience  of  the  king  that 
he  had  to  be  christened,  he  took  him  up  with 
weeping  tears  and  baptized  him  with  all  his  house- 
hold and  meiny,  and  enformed  them  diligently  in 
v the  Christian  faith  with  great  joy  and  gladness. 
And  when  all  this  was  done  S.  Austin,  desiring 
the  health  of  the  people  of  England,  went  forth 
on  foot  to  York ; and  when  he  came  nigh  to  the 
city  there  met  him  a blind  man  which  said  to 
him : O thou  holy  Austin,  help  me  that  am  full 
needy.  To  whom  S.  Austin  said:  I have  no 
silver,  but  such  as  I have  I give  thee;  in  the 
name  of  Jesu  Christ  arise  and  be  all  whole,  and 
with  that  word  he  received  his  sight  and  believed 
in  our  Lord  and  was  baptized.  And  upon’ 
Christmas  day  he  baptized,  in  the  river  named 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


199 


Swale,  ten  thousand  men  without  women  and  The 
children,  and  there  was  a great  multitude  of  people  Life 1 of 
resorting  to  the  said  river,  which  was  so  deep 
that  no  man  might  pass  over  on  foot,  and  yet  by 
miracle  of  our  Lord  there  was  neither  man,  woman, 
ne  child  drowned,  but  they  that  were  sick  were 
made  whole  both  in  body  and  in  soul.  And  in 
the  same  place  they  builded  a church  in  the 
worship  of  God  and  S.  Austin.  And  when 
S.  Austin  had  preached  the  faith  to  the  people 
and  had  confirmed  them  steadfastly  therein,  he 
returned  again  from  York,  and  by  the  way  he 
met  a leper  asking  help,  and  when  S.  Austin  had 
said  these  words  to  him:  In  the  name  of  Jesu 
Christ  be  thou  cleansed  from  all  thy  leprosy,  anon 
all  his  filth  fell  away,  and  a fair  new  skin  appeared 
on  his  body  so  that  he  seemed  all  a new  man. 

Also  as  S.  Austin  came  in  to  Oxfordshire  to 
a town  that  is  called  Compton  to  preach  the  word 
of  God,  to  whom  the  curate  said : Holy  father, 
the  lord  of  this  lordship  hath  been  ofttimes 
warned  of  me  to  pay  his  tithes  to  God,  and  yet 
he  withholdeth  them,  and  therefore  I have  cursed 
him,  and  I find  him  the  more  obstinate.  To 
whom  S.  Austin  said : Son,  why  payest  thou  not 
thy  tithes  to  God  and  to  the  church  ? Knowest 
thou  not  that  the  tithes  be  not  thine  but  belong 
to  God?  And  then  the  knight  said  to  him:  I 
know  well  that  I till  the  ground,  wherefore  I 
ought  as  well  to  have  the  tenth  sheaf  as  the  ninth, 
and  when  S.  Austin  could  not  turn  the  knight’s 
entent,  then  he  departed  from  him  and  went  to 
mass.  And  ere  he  began  he  charged  that  all 
they  that  were  accursed  should  go  out  of  the 
church,  and  then  rose  a dead  body  and  went  out 
in  to  the  churchyard  with  a white  cloth  on  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


200 


THE. GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  head,  and  stood  still  there  till  the  mass  was  done. 

Life  of  And  then  S.  Austin  went  to  him  and  demanded 
S.  Austin  jjjm  what  ije  waS)  and  he  answered  and  said  : I was 
sometime  lord  of  this  town,  and  because  I would  not 
pay  my  tithes  to  my  curate  he  accursed  me,  and 
so  I died  and  went  to  hell.  And  then  S.  Austin 
bade  bring  him  to  the  place  where  his  curate  was 
buried,  and  then  the  carrion  brought  him  thither 
to  the  grave,  and  because  that  all  men  should 
know  that  life  and  death  be  in  the  power  of  God, 
S.  Austin  said : I command  thee  in  the  name  of 
God  to  arise,  for  we  have  need  of  thee,  and  then 
he  arose  anon,  and  stood  before  all  the  people. 
To  whom  S.  Austin  said : Thou  knowest  well 
that  our  Lord  is  merciful,  and  I demand  thee, 
brother,  if  thou  knowest  this  man  ? and  he  said : 
Yea,  would  God  that  I had  never  known  him,  for 
he  was  a withholder  of  his  tithes,  and  in  all  his 
life  an  evil  doer,  thou  knowest  that  our  Lord  is 
merciful,  and  as  long  as  the  pains  of  hell  endure 
let  us  also  be  merciful  to  all  Christians.  And  then 
S.  Austin  delivered  to  the  curate  a rod,  and  there 
the  knight  kneeling  on  his  knees  was  assoiled, 
and  then  he  commanded  him  to  go  again  to  his 
grave,  and  there  to  abide  till  the  day  of  doom  ; 
and  he  entered  anon  into  his  grave  and  forthwith 
fell  to  ashes  and  powder.  And  then  S.  Austin  said 
to  the  priest : How  long  hast  thou  lain  here  ? and 
he  said  a hundred  and  fifty  years;  and  then  he 
asked  how  it  stood  with  him,  and  he  said : Well, 
holy  father,  for  I am  in  everlasting  bliss ; and  then 
said  S.  Austin  : Wilt  thou  that  I pray  to  almighty 
God  that  thou  abide  here  with  us  to  confirm  the 
hearts  of  men  in  very  belief?  And  then  he  said : 
Nay,  holy  father,  for  I am  in  a place  of  rest  5 and 
then  said  S.  Austin : Go  in  peace,  and  pray  for 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


201 


me  and  for  all  holy  church,  and  he  then  entered  The 
again  into  his  grave,  and  anon  the  body  was  turned  Life  of 
to  earth.  Of  this  sight  the  lord  was  sore  afeard,  s*  Austm 
and  came  all  quaking  to  S.  Austin  and  to  his 
curate,  and  demanded  forgiveness  of  his  trespass, 
and  promised  to  make  amends  and  ever  after  to 
pay  his  tithes  and  to  follow  the  doctrine  of 
S.  Austin. 

After  this  S.  Austin  entered  into  Dorsetshire, 
and  came  in  to  a town  whereas  were  wicked 
people  who  refused  his  doctrine  and  preaching 
utterly  and  drove  him  out  of  the  town,  casting  on 
him  the  tails  of  thornbacks,  or  like  fishes,  where- 
fore he  besought  almighty  God  to  show  his  judg- 
ment on  them,  and  God  sent  to  them  a shameful 
token,  for  the  children  that  were  born  after  in  that 
place  had  tails,  as  it  is  said,  till  they  had  repented 
them.  It  is  said  commonly  that  this  fell  at  Strood 
in  Kent,  but  blessed  be  God  at  this  day  is  no  such 
deformity.  Item  in  another  place  there  were 
certain  people  which  would  in  no  wise  give  faith 
to  his  preaching  ne  his  doctrine,  but  scorned  and 
mocked  him,  wherefore  God  took  such  vengeance 
that  they  burned  with  fire  invisible,  so  that  their 
skin  was  red  as  blood,  and  suffered  so  great  pain 
that  they  were  constrained  to  come  and  ask  for- 
giveness of  S.  Austin,  and  then  he  prayed  God 
for  them  that  they  might  be  acceptable  to  him  and 
receive  baptism  and  that  he  would  release  their 
pain,  and  then  he  christened  them  and  that  burning 
heat  was  quenched  and  they  were  made  perfectly 
whole,  and  felt  never  after  more  thereof.  On  a 
time,  as  S.  Austin  was  in  his  prayers,  our  Lord 
appeared  to  him,  and  comforting  him  with  a 
gentle  and  familiar  speech,  said : O thou  my  good 
servant  and  true,  be  thou  comforted  and  do  manly. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


202 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  for  I thy  Lord  God  am  with  thee  in  all  thine 
Life  of  affection,  and  mine  ears  be  open  to  thy  prayers, 
Austm  and  for  whom  thou  demandest  any  petition  thou 
shalt  have  thy  desire,  and  the  gate  of  everlasting 
life  is  open  to  thee,  where  thou  shalt  joy  with  me 
without  end.  And  in  that  same  place  where  our 
Lord  said  these  words  he  fixed  his  staff  into  the 
ground,  and  a well  of  clear  water  sourded  and 
sprang  up  in  that  same  place,  the  which  well  is 
called  Cerne,  and  it  is  in  the  country  of  Dorset, 
whereas  now  is  builded  a fair  abbey,  and  is 
named  Cerne  after  the  well.  And  the  church  is 
builded  in  the  same  place  whereas  our  Lord  ap- 
peared to  S.  Austin.  Also  in  the  same  country 
was  a young  man  that  was  lame,  dumb,  and  deaf, 
and  by  the  prayers  of  S.  Austin  he  was  made 
whole,  and  then  soon  after  he  was  dissolute  and 
wanton,  and  noyed  and  grieved  the  people  with 
jangling  and  talking  in  the  church.  Aiid  then 
God  sent  to  him  his  old  infirmity  again,  because 
of  his  misguiding,  and  at  the  last  he  fell  to  re- 
pentance, and  asked  God  forgiveness  and  S.  Austin. 
And  S.  Austin  prayed  for  him  and  he  was  made 
whole  again  the  second  time,  and  after  that  he  con- 
tinued in  good  and  virtuous  living  to  his  life’s  end. 

And  after  this  S.  Austin,  full  of  virtues,  de- 

f>arted  out  of  this  world  unto  our  Lord  God,  and 
ieth  buried  at  Canterbury  in  the  abbey  that  he 
founded  there  in  the  worship  and  rule,  whereas 
our  Lord  God  showeth  yet  daily  many  miracles. 
And  the  third  day  before  the  nativity  of  our 
Lady  is  hallowed  the  translation  of  S.  Austin.  In 
which  night  a citizen  of  Canterbury,  being  that 
time  at  Winchester,  saw  heaven  open  over  the 
church  of  S.  Austin,  and  a burning  ladder  shining 
full  bright,  and  angels  coming  down  to  the  same 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


203 


church.  And  then  him  thought  that  the  church 
had  burned  of  the  great  light  and  brightness  that 
came  down  on  the  ladder,  and  marvelled  greatly 
what  this  should  mean,  for  he  knew  nothing  of 
the  translation  of  S.  Austin ; and  when  he  knew 
the  truth,  that  on  that  time  the  body  of  the 
glorious  saint  was  translated,  he  gave  laud  and 
thank ings  to  almighty  God,  and  we  may  verily 
know  by  that  evident  vision  that  it  is  an  holy  and 
devout  place ; and  as  it  is  said  that  of  old  time, 
ancient  holy  men  that  used  to  come  thither  would 
at  the  entry  of  it  do  off  their  hosen  and  shoes  and 
durst  not  presume  to  go  into  that  holy  monastery 
but  barefoot,  because  so  many  holy  saints  be  there 
shrined  and  buried.  And  God  hath  showed  so 
many  miracles  in  that  holy  place  for  his  blessed 
saint,  S.  Austin,  that  if  I should  write  them  here 
it  should  occupy  a great  book.  Then  let  us  pray 
unto  S.  Austin,  father  and  apostle  of  England,  by 
whom  this  land  was  converted  unto  the  Christian 
faith,  and  by  his  ordinance  bishops  were  ordained 
to  minister  the  sacraments,  that  he  be  moyen  unto 
our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  that  we  may  here  so  live 
according  to  his  doctrine  that  after  this  life  we 
may  come  to  everlasting  bliss  in  heaven.  Amen. 


Here  next  followeth  the  life  of  S.  Germain , and first 
the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Germain  is  said  of  germ  and  of  ana  that  is  high, 
that  is  that  there  were  found  in  the  seed  of 
Germain  three  sovereign  things,  that  is  heat 
natural,  humour,  and  nourishing,  and  reason  of 
sCmence  or  seed.  Germain  is  said  seed  burgeon- 
ing, for  he  had  in  him  heat  by  ardour  of  great 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Germain 


204 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  dilection,  humour  by  eagerness  of  devotion,  and 
°£S.  seed  by  virtue  of  his  predication  by  which  he 
uermam  engendered  much  people  to  the  faith.  And  Con- 
stantinus  the  priest  wrote  his  life  to  S.  Censurius, 
bishop  of  Auxerre. 

Of  S,  Germain . 

S.  Germain  was  of  much  noble  lineage  born  in 
the  city  of  Auxerre  and  was  well  learned  in  the  arts 
liberal.  And  after,  he  went  to  Rome  for  to  learn 
the  sciences  of  droit  and  of  the  law,  and  there  re- 
ceived he  so  much  dignity  that  the  senate  sent  him 
to  the  Frenchmen  for  to  have  the  rule  and  dignity 
of  Burgundy.  And  thus  as  he  governed  the  city 
of  Auxerre  more  diligently  than  the  other,  there 
was  in  the  middle  of  the  city  a tree  called  a pine- 
apple tree,  on  which  were  hanged  on  the  branches 
of  this  tree,  for  the  marvel  of  chase  and  hunting, 
the  heads  of  wild  beasts  that  had  been  slain.  But 
when  S.  Amadour,  which  was  bishop  of  this  city, 
reproved  them  of  such  vanities,  and  warned  them 
to  hew  down  this  tree,  they  would  not  consent 
thereto  in  any  manner.  And  on  a time,  when 
Germain  was  not  in  the  city,  the  bishop  did  do 
hew  down  this  tree,  and  did  do  burn  it.  And 
when  Germain  knew  it  he  was  much  angry,  and 
forgot  Christian  religion,  and  came  with  a great 
multitude  of  knights  for  to  have  slain  the  bishop. 
And  then  the  bishop  knew  by  revelation  divine 
that  S.  Germain  should  be  his  successor,  and 
forbare  and  gave  place  to  his  hastiness,  and  went 
to  Autun,  and  after,  when  he  was  come  again  to 
Auxerre,  he  enclosed  much  subtilly  Germain 
within  the  church  and  sacred  him  there,  and  said 
to  him  that  he  should  be  his  successor  in  the 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


205 


bishopric,  and  so  he  was ; for  a little  after  The  Life 
S.  Amadour  died  and  all  the  people  required  of  S. 

S.  Germain  to  be  bishop,  and  then  he  gave  all  Germain 
his  riches  to  poor  people,  and  changed  his  wife 
into  his  sister,  and  tormented  his  body  by  the  space 
of  thirty  years,  that  he  never  ate  bread  of  wheat, 
ne  drank  wine,  ne  used  no  pottage,  and  would 
have  never  salt  to  make  his  meat  savoury*  And 
two  times  in  the  year  he  would  drink  wine,  that 
was  at  Easter  and  Christmas,  and  yet  for  to  take 
away  the  savour  of  the  wine  he  would  put  therein 
plenty  of  water,  and  in  his  refection  he  would  take 
barley  bread  with  ashes,  and  fasted  every  day,  and 
never  ate  but  in  the  even.  In  winter  ne  summer 
he  had  but  one  clothing,  and  that  was  the  hair 
next  his  body,  a coat  and  a gown,  and  if  it  happed 
so  that  he  gave  not  his  vesture  to  some  poor  body, 
he  would  wear  it  till  it  were  broken  and  torn. 

His  bed  was  environed  with  ashes,  hair,  and  sack- 
cloth, and  his  head  lay  no  higher  than  his 
shoulders,  but  all  day  wept,  and  bare  about  his 
neck  divers  relics  of  saints.  He  ware  none  other 
clothing,  and  he  went  oft  barefoot  and  seldom  ware 
any  girdle.  The  life  that  he  led  was  above  man’s 
power.  His  life  was  so  straight  and  hard  that 
it  was  marvel  and  pity  to  see  his  flesh,  and  was 
like  a thing  not  credible,  and  he  did  so  many 
miracles  that,  if  his  merits  had  not  gone  before, 
they  should  have  been  trowed  phantasms.  In  a 
time  he  was  harboured  in  a place  where  always 
after  supper  the  tables  were  covered  when  all  men 
had  supped,  whereof  he  marvelled,  and  demanded 
the  host  wherefore  they  covered  the  tables  again 
after  supper,  and  the  host  said  it  was  for  his  neigh- 
bours that  came  to  drink  each  with  other.  And 
that  night  S.  Germain  concluded  to  watch  for  to 


Digitized  by  vjOOQIC 


20 6 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  see  what  it  should  be.  It  was  not  long  after  that 
of  S.  there  came  in  there  a great  multitude  of  devils, 
Germain  an(j  8at  at  t^e  table  in  likeness  of  men  and  women  ; 
and  when  the  holy  man  saw  them  he  commanded 
them  that  they  should  not  depart,  and  then  sent 
to  awake  the  host,  and  all  the  neighbours  and 
guests  on  all  sides,  in  such  wise  that  every  man 
and  woman  were  found  in  their  houses,  and  he 
made  all  them  to  come  and  see  if  they  knew  any 
of  them.  And  they  said  nay ; and  then  he  showed 
them  that  they  were  devils  ; of  whom  the  people 
was  much  abashed  because  the  devils  mocked  them 
so.  And  then  S.  Germain  conjured  them,  and 
they  went  their  way,  and  never  after  returned. 

In  a time  S.  Lupus  bishop  of  Troyes  was  be- 
sieged by  the  king  Attila,  and  S.  Lupus  went  upon 
the  gate,  and  demanded  who  he  was  that  assieged 
and  assailed  them,  and  the  king  said  to  him : I 
am  he,  Attila,  the  scourge  and  rod  of  God.  And 
then  the  meek  bishop  said  to  him,  sore  weeping : I 
am  Lupus  that  have  wasted  the  flock  of  God  and 
have  need  of  the  scourging  of  God  ; and  then  S. 
Lupus  commanded  to  open  the  gates,  and  all  the 
people  of  Attila  were  so,  by  the  will  of  God, 
blinded,  and  they  passed  through  the  town,  and 
saw  no  men  .of  the  city,  ne  did  no  hurt  to  nobody. 
And  then  the  blessed  S.  Lupus  took  S.  Germain 
with  him  and  went  into  Britain,  whereas  there 
were  heresies.  But  when  they  were  on  the  sea 
there  arose  a right  great  tempest,  which  by  the 
merits  of  S.  Germain  was  anon  appeased.  Then 
they  were  honestly  received  of  the  people  of  the 
country,  whose  coming  the  devils  that  S.  Germain 
had  driven  out  of  such  bodies  as  were  beset  had 
told  their  coming.  And  when  they  had  been  a 
while  in  England  and  had  convanquished  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


207 


heretics,  they  returned  into  their  countries  and  The  Life 
proper  places.  . 

On  a time  it  happed  that  S.  Germain  lay  sick  *jermam 
of  a malady  in  a street,  and  the  street  was  taken 
with  fire,  and  men  counselled  him  to  be  borne 
thence  for  peril  of  the  fire,  and  then  he  put  him- 
self against  the  fire,  and  the  flame  burnt  all  about, 
and  touched  nothing  that  Germain  lay  in. 

Another  time  he  returned  in  to  Britain  for  the 
heresies,  and  one  of  his  disciples  followed  him 
hastily,  and  fell  sick  and  lay  down  in  a town,  and 
there  died ; and  when  3.  Germain  returned 
thereby  he  demanded  to  see  the  sepulchre  of  his 
disciple  which  there  was  dead,  and  did  do  open 
his  sepulchre,  and  he  called  him  by  his  name,  and 
demanded  him  what  he  did,  and  if  he  would  no 
longer  go  with  him,  and  that  other  answered  and 
said  that  he  was  well,  and  all  things  were  to  him 
soft  and  sweet,  and  would  no  more  come  here ; 
and  the  holy  man  granted  it  him  that  he  should 
abide  in  rest,  and  he  remised  himself  in  his  grave 
and  slept  in  our  Lord. 

He  preached  on  a time  in  the  country  of  Britain 
in  such  wise  that  the  king  of  Britain  forbade  him 
his  house,  and  his  people  also.  Then  it  happed 
that  the  king’s  cowherd  went  to  the  pasture  with 
his  kine,  and  received  his  portion  at  the  king’s 
palace,  and  bare  it  to  his  little  house.  Then  went 
S.  Germain  and  his  fellowship  for  to  see  where 
they  might  be  lodged,  and  the  cowherd  brought 
them  to  his  house,  and  he  saw  that  they  had  great 
hunger,  but  he  had  not  meat  for  them  and  him. 

This  cowherd  had  but  one  calf ; he  slew  it  and 
gave  it  to  them,  and  they  took  it  debonairly  of  the 
little  good  that  he  had,  and  when  they  had  supped 
and  said  graces,  S.  Germain  did  do  gather  together 

VOL.  hi.  o 


Digitized  by  Goode 


20 8 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  all  the  bones  of  the  calf  and  laid  them  under  the 
°f  S.  8kin,  and  after,  made  his  prayers  to  God,  and  anon 
Germain  then  the  cajf  arose  all  alive  and  whole  as  he  was 
tofore.  And  the  next  day  after,  S.  Germain 
demanded  the  king  why  he  had  forbidden  him  his 
house,  and  the  king  was  much  abashed  and  could 
not  answer.  Then  said  S.  Germain  to  him : Thou 
shalt  no  more  reign,  but  thou  shalt  leave  thy  realm 
to  one  better  than  thee. 

And  as  they  of  Saxony  should  fight  against  the 
Britons,  and  they  saw  that  they  were  but  few, 
and  saw  the  holy  man  pass  by,  they  called  him. 
And  then  S.  Germain  and  his  fellows  preached  so 
long  to  them  that  they  came  to  grace  of  baptism. 
And  on  Easter  day  they  cast  off  their  armours,  and 
by  great  desire  of  faith  purposed  them  to  fight. 
And  when  the  other  heard  that,  they  purposed  to 
go  against  them  hardily  for  they  were  dissevered, 
and  S Germain  hid  him  away  with  his  people, 
and  warned  them  when  he  cried : Alleluia ! they 
should  answer  with  one  voice,  and  when  the  saints 
had  cried,  alleluia ! and  the  other  had  answered, 
their  enemies  had  so  great  dread  that  they  threw 
all  their  harness  and  armours  away,  and  weened 
certainly  that  all  the  mountains  should  fall  on  them 
and  also  heaven,  and  so  they  fled  all  afraid. 

On  a time  as  S.  Germain  passed  by  Autun  and 
went  to  the  tomb  of  S.  Cassian,  he  enquired  how  it 
stood  with  him ; he  answered  to  him  out  of  the  tomb 
wherein  he  lay,  and  said : I am  in  sweet  rest  and 
abide  the  coming  of  the  Redeemer.  And  he  said 
to  him : Rest  in  peace  in  the  name  of  our  Lord, 
and  pray  for  us  devoutly  that  we  may  deserve  the 
holy  joys  of  the  resurrection.  And  when  S. 
Germain  came  in  Ravenna  he  was  received  much 
honorably  of  Placida  the  queen,  and  of  Valentinian 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


209 


her  son,  and  at  the  supper  she  sent  to  him  a great 
vessel  ot  silver  full  of  delicious  meat,  the  which 
he  received,  and  gave  the  meat  to  his  servants,  and 
retained  the  vessel  of  silver  for  to  give  to  the  poor. 
And  instead  of  this  gift  he  sent  to  the  queen  a 
dish  of  wood  or  of  tree  and  a barley  loaf,  the 
which  she  received  gladly,  and  after,  did  do  cover 
that  dish  with  silver  and  kept  it  long  in  great 
devotion.  On  a time  that  the  said  queen  had 
desired  him  to  dine  with  her,  he  accorded  thereto 
gladly,  and  because  he  was  weary  of  travail,  of 
fasting  and  watching,  he  came  upon  an  ass  from 
his  house  unto  the  palace,  and  anon  as  he  was  at 
dinner  his  ass  died.  And  when  the  queen  knew 
that  his  ass  was  dead,  she  was  much  sorrowful,  and 
did  do  present  him  a right  fair  and  good  horse. 
And  when  the  saint  saw  him  so  richly  adorned 
and  apparelled  he  would  in  no  wise  take  it,  but 
said : Show  to  me  where  mine  ass  is,  for  he  that 
brought  me  hither  shall  bring  me  home  again. 
And  then  he  went  to  his  ass,  that  lay  dead,  and 
said  to  him : Let  us  return  home  again,  and  anon 
the  ass  arose  and  shook  him  as  he  had  risen  from 
sleep  and  that  he  had  no  harm,  and  then  Germain 
remounted  on  his  ass  and  rode  home.  But  tofore 
ere  he  departed  from  Ravenna  he  said  that  he 
should  not  be  long  in  this  world,  and  anon  after 
he  became  sick  of  the  fevers,  and  the  seventh  day 
after,  he  passed  unto  our  Lord  and  his  body  was 
borne  into  France,  as  he  had  required  to  the 
queen.  And  he  died  about  the  year  of  our  Lord 
four  hundred  and  twenty. 

S.  Germain  had  promised,  by  his  life,  to  S. 
Eusebius  bishop  of  Versailles,  that  when  he  returned 
he  should  hallow  his  church  that  he  had  founded, 
and  when  S.  Eusebius,  bishop  of  Versailles, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Germain 


210 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  understood  that  he  was  dead,  he  would  himself 
Life  of  hallow  his  church,  and  made  to  light  the  candles 
Deacon  an<^  top61"S. * * 8*  but  the  more  they  lighted  them  the 
more  were  they  extinct  and  put  out.  And  when 
Eusebius  saw  that,  he  perceived  that  the  dedication 
was  made  ere  he  would  come  and  do  it,  or  else  of 
some  other  bishop.  And  when  the  body  of  S. 
Germain  was  brought  to  Versailles,  as  soon  as  it 
was  entered  in  to  the  church  all  the  tapers  were 
lit  divinely.  Then  S.  Eusebius  remembered  the 
promises  of  S.  Germain,  and  that  which  he  pro- 
mised, living,  he  would  do  it  being  dead.  But  it 
is  not  to  be  understood  of  the  great  Eusebius  of 
Versailles,  that  this  was  done  in  his  time,  for  he 
died  under  Valens  the  emperor,  and  from  the 
death  of  him  unto  the  death  of  S.  Germain  was 
more  than  fifty  years  from  that  one  to  that  other, 
but  this  was  another  Eusebius  under  whom  this 
said  thing  was  done. 


Here  follow eth  the  Life  of  S.  Peter  the  Exorcist  or 
Deacon . 

S.  Peter  the  deacon  was  bound  with  chains  of 
iron  in  prison  of  one  Archemius  whose  daughter 
was  vexed  of  a fiend,  wherefore  he  was  much 

sorrowful.  Then  said  S.  Peter  to  him  that  Jesu 

Christ  should  well  heal  her  if  he  would  believe  in 
him.  To  whom  Archemius  answered : I marvel 
much  of  thee  because  thou  sufferest  so  much  for 
thy  God  and  I see  that  he  may  not  deliver  thee. 

S.  Peter  said : He  will  well  that  I suffer  for  to 
deserve  the  glory  that  alway  shall  endure,  but  he 
can  well  deliver  me  if  he  would,  and  heal  also  thy 
daughter.  To  whom  Archemius  said : I shall 
double  thy  chains,  and  if  then  thy  God  may 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


21  X 


deliver  thee,  and  also  make  my  daughter  whole,  I The 
shall  believe  in  him.  And  when  that  was  done,  Life  of 
S.  Peter,  clad  in  white  clothes,  holding  the  sign 
of  the  cross,  appeared  to  him,  and  then  anon 
Archemius  fell  down  to  his  feet  and  his  daughter 
was  made  all  whole.  He  then  with  all  his  house 
received  baptism  and  he  let  out  of  prison  all  the 
Christian  men  and  all  them  that  would  be  Christian, 
and  he  with  many  other  that  believed  were 
baptized  of  S.  Marcellin  priest.  When  the  provost 
of  Rome  heard  this  he  made  all  the  Christian  men 
come  tofore  him,  whom  Archemius  gathered  to- 
gether, kissing  their  hands,  and  said  that  who 
would  come  to  be  martyred  should  come  hardily 
without  dread,  and  he  that  dare  not  come,  let  him 
go  in  peace  where  he  will.  And  when  the  provost 
knew  for  certain  that  S.  Peter  and  S.  Marcellin 
had  baptized  them,  he  made  them  come  tofore  him, 
and  departed  that  one  from  that  other,  and  put 
them  so  in  prison.  And  S.  Marcellin  was  laid 
naked  upon  broken  glass,  without  light  or  water, 
and  S.  Peter  was  imprisoned  in  a strait  place 
wherein  he  was  strained.  Then  came  an  angel 
from  heaven  and  unbound  S.  Marcellin,  and  clad 
him,  and  brought  him  with  Peter  into  the  house  of 
Archemius,  because  they  should  seven  days  comfort 
the  people  busily.  After,  when  he  found  not 
Marcellin  in  prison  whereas  he  had  set  him,  he 
sent  for  Archemius  and  commanded  him  and  his 
household  to  do  sacrifice,  and  they  would  not 
obey  to  him.  He  put  then  him  and  his  wife  into 
a pit  in  the  earth.  Then  when  S.  Marcellin  and 
S.  Peter  heard  tell  the  adventure  of  Archemius, 
they  came  to  him  and  sung  mass  in  the  same  pit 
with  seven  Christian  men  that  defended  them,  and 
after,  they  said  to  the  paynims  : We  might  well,  if 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


212 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  we  would,  deliver  Archemius  and  hide  ourselves, 
Lives  of  but  we  will  do  neither.  Then  the  paynims  smote 
Pdmeand  Arch61™118  with  a sword  through  the  body  and 
Felidan  killed  him,  and  after,  stoned  to  death  his  wife  and 
his  daughter.  Then  brought  they  S.  Marcellin 
and  S.  Peter  to  the  black  isle  and  there  beheaded 
them,  which  place  is  called  now  Candia,  for  their 
martyrdom,  and  thus  they  suffered  martyrdom 
the  year  of  grace  seven  hundred  and  eighty-seven, 
and  they  that  smote  off  their  heads  saw  their  souls, 
adorned  with  roses  and  precious  stones,  borne  up  to 
heaven  by  angels.  One  Dorotheus,  that  was  one 
of  them  that  beheaded  them,  saw  it,  wherefore  he 
became  Christian  and  lived  after  a holy  life  and 
after  rested  in  our  Lord. 


Here  followed  of  SS.  Prime  and  Felician9  and  of  the  I 
interpretation  frst  of  their  names . 

Primus  is  as  much  to  say  as  sovereign  and  great, 
and  Felician  is  as  much  to  say  as  a blessed  or 
happy  old  man.  Primus  is  said  sovereign  and 
great  in  dignity,  for  suffering  of  his  martyrdom, 
and  puissant  for  the  operation  of  miracles,  holy  for 
the  perfection  of  his  life,  and  blessed  for  his 
glorious  fruition.  Felician  is  said  happy  old  man, 
not  only  for  the  ancient  of  time,  but  for  the 
reverence  of  dignity,  for  the  ripeness  of  wisdom, 
and  for  the  weight  of  his  manners. 


Of  Saints  Prime  and  Felician . 

Prime  and  Felician  were  accused  to  the 
emperors  Diocletian  and  Maximian,  of  the  priests 
and  bishops  of  the  idols,  to  the  end  that  they 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


213 


should  do  sacrifice,  and  they  said  but  if  they  so  did  The 
their  gods  would  do  nothing  for  them.  Then,  by  Lives  of 
the  commandment  of  the  emperors,  they  were  shut 
in  prison  and  bound  with  chains  of  iron,  but  anon  Felician 
after,  the  angel  unbound  them  and  presented  them 
tofore  the  emperor,  and  when  he  found  them  fast 
and  firm  in  die  faith  he  did  do  beat  them,  and 
after  that  departed  one  of  them  from  that  other, 
and  then  said  the  provost  to  S.  Felician  that  he 
should  have  pity  on  his  old  age,  and  that  he  should 
sacrifice  to  their  gods.  Then  answered  he  : Lo ! 

I am  four  score  years  old,  and  it  is  thirty  years 
since  I knew  the  truth,  and  that  I have  purposed 
to  serve  God,  which  may  well  deliver  me  from 
thy  hands.  Then  the  provost  did  him  be  bounden, 
and  made  nails  to  be  driven  into  his  feet  and 
hands,  and  said  to  him : Thou  shalt  be  in  this 
point  so  long  till  thou  consent  to  us  and  shalt  do 
our  wills.  And  when  the  provost  saw  that  he 
suffered  his  martyrdom  so  gladly  and  so  joyously, 
he  did  him  to  be  tormented  again,  and  commanded 
that  nothing  should  be  ministered  to  him  to  eat. 

After  this  he  made  S.  Prime  to  come  tofore  him 
and  said  to  him  : Lo ! thy  brother  hath  consented 
to  the  saying  of  the  emperor  and  therefore  he  is 
worshipped  greatly  in  his  palace,  do  thou  the  same 
wise  To  whom  he  said : Though  thou  be  the 
son  of  the  devil  yet  in  part  thou  sayest  the  truth  that 
my  brother  hath  consented  to  the  decree  of  my 
heavenly  emperor.  Then  the  provost  was  angry, 
and  commanded  to  set  fire  and  burn  his  sides,  and 
to  pour  boiling  lead  in  to  his  mouth  in  the  presence 
of  Felician,  to  fear  him  withal,  and  he  drank  it  as 
sweetly  as  it  had  been  cold  water.  Then  the 
provost,  being  all  angry  and  enraged,  commanded 
two  lions  to  be  put  to  them,  which  anon  as  they 


Digitized  by 


Google 


214 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Barnabas 


were  put  to  them  fell  down  to  their  feet  and  stood 
afore  them  like  meek  lambs.  Then  after,  he  sent 
two  cruel  bears  which  anon  became  as  mild  and 
debonair  as  the  lions.  There  were  in  the  place 
that  saw  this  well  twelve  thousand  men,  of  whom 
five  hundred  believed  in  Jesu  Christ.  Then  the 
provost  did  the  saints  to  be  beheaded,  and  threw 
their  bodies  to  dogs  and  to  birds,  but  they  never 
touched  them,  and  after  this  Christian  men  buried 
them.  And  these  blessed  saints  were  thus  martyred 
the  year  of  our  Lord  two  hundred  and  eighty- 
seven.  Then  let  us  pray  to  these  saints  that  we 
may  come  to  everlasting  bliss  in  heaven.  Amen. 


Here  follow  eth  the  Life  of  S.  Barnabas  the  Apostle, 
and  first  the  interpretation  of  his  name . 

Barnabas  is  as  much  to  say  as  the  son  of  him 
that  cometh,  or  the  son  of  consolation,  or  the  son 
of  a prophet,  or  a son  concluding.  He  is  four 
times  said  a son  by  four  manners  of  expositions, 
he  is  said  son  in  scripture  by  reason  of  generation, 
of  erudition,  of  imitation,  and  of  adoption.  He 
was  regenerate  of  Jesu  Christ  by  baptism,  and  he 
was  taught  by  the  gospel  and  followed  him  by 
martyrdom,  and  adopted  by  heavenly  reward,  and 
this  was  touching  himself.  As  touching  others 
he  was  coming,  comforting,  prophesying  and  con- 
cluding. Coming,  in  running  and  preaching  over 
all,  and  that  appeareth  for  he  was  fellow  of  S. 
Paul.  Comforting  poor  people  and  desolate,  to 
poor  people  in  giving  alms,  to  desolate  in  sending 
epistles  in  the  name  of  the  apostles.  Prophesying 
for  he  flowered  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  In 
concluding,  for  he  concluded  a great  multitude  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


215 


people  and  converted  them  to  the  faith,  as  it  The  Life 
appeareth  when  he  was  sent  to  Antioch.  And  of  S. 
that  saith  the  book  called  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Barnabas 
As  to  the  first  he  was  a man  and  manly,  to  the 
second  good ; as  to  the  third,  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  as  to  the  fourth,  true.  His  passion 
Bede  compiled  out  of  Greek  into  Latin. 

Of  S . Barnabas  the  Apostle . 

S.  Barnabas  was  a deacon,  and  was  born  in 
Cyprus,  and  was  one  of  the  seventy-two  disciples 
of  our  Lord,  and  is  greatly  praised  in  the  history 
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  of  many  good  things 
that  were  in  him,  for  he  was  right  well  informed 
and  ordinate,  as  well  to  himself  as  to  God  and 
to  his  neighbour.  He  was  well  ordinate  in  him- 
self after  three  virtues  that  be  in  the  soul,  that  is 
to  say  reason,  desire,  and  strength ; he  had  reason 
illumined  with  the  clearness  of  very  knowledge, 
hereof  is  said  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the 
thirteenth  chapter.  It  is  said  that  there  were  in 
the  church  of  Antioch  doctors,  prophets  and  great 
masters  in  holy  scripture  among  whom  were 
Barnabas,  Simon,  and  many  other  great  clerks, 
yet  had  he  desire  well  ordinate  and  expurged 
them  from  the  dust  of  all  worldly  affection,  and 
thereof  is  found  in  the  Acts  of  Apostles  the  fourth 
chapter,  that  he  sold  a field  that  he  had,  and  the 
value  and  price  thereof  he  laid  at  the  feet  of  the 
apostles.  And  the  gloss  saith : S.  Barnabas 

showed  to  us  herein  that  we  ought  leave  the 
things  that  men  should  not  put  thereon  their 
desire  ne  their  heart,  and  taught  us  to  despise 
gold  and  silver,  by  that  that  he  laid  the  silver 
at  the  feet  of  the  apostles,  yet  had  he  the  virtue 


,y  Google 


216 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  of  the  soul  which  is  called  strength,  well  affirmed 
of  S.  wjth  prowess  of  patience,  and  that  may  we  see 
xnabas  on  the  great  things  and  high  that  he  emprised, 
and  on  the  great  penances  that  he  did,  and  on  the 
great  torments  and  pains  that  he  suffered.  Great 
things  then  he  emprised,  and  that  may  we  see 
when  he  took  upon  him  to  convert  so  great  a city 
as  was  Antioch.  For  when  S.  Paul  came  into 
Jerusalem  anon  after  his  conversion,  and  would 
accompany  him  with  the  disciples,  they  fled  all 
away,  like  sheep  do  from  wolves,  but  Barnabas 
went  anon  to  him,  and  took  and  brought  him  in 
to  the  company  of  the  apostles.  After,  he  enforced 
his  body  with  great  penances  that  he  did,  for  he 
tormented  it  with  aspre  and  hard  fastings,  yet  was 
S.  Barnabas  a man  enforced  to  suffer  pains  and 
torments;  for  he  and  S.  Paul  abandoned  their 
lives  overall  for  the  love  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ. 
Secondly,  he  was  ordained  as  touching  to  God 
in  bearing,  authority,  majesty,  and  bounty.  He 
bare  honour  and  reverence  unto  the  great  authority 
of  God,  after  that  we  find  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  the  thirteenth  chapter,  when  the  Holy 
Ghostsaid:  Take  ye  to  me  apart,  Barnabas  and 
Paul,  for  to  do  the  office  that  I have  chosen  them 
to.  Yet  S.  Barnabas  bare  honour  to  the  great 
majesty  of  God,  for  when  there  should  be  done 
reverence  to  him  and  sacrifice  as  to  a God,  and 
was  called  Jupiter  as  he  that  went  before,  and 
they  called  Paul,  Mercury,  as  a fair  and  wise 
speaker.  Anon  Barnabas  and  Paul  rent  and  tare 
their  coats,  and  cried  all  on  high:  Ye  people, 
what  do  ye?  We  be  mortal  as  ye  be,  which 
warn  you  to  turn  and  convert  to  the  very  God 
living,  Jesu  Christ.  After,  S.  Barnabas  bare 
reverence  to  the  bounty  of  God,  after  that  is 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  217 

found  in  the  Acts  of  Apostles  the  fifteenth  chapter. 
Some  converts  of  the  Jews  would  minish  the 
bounty  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  said  that  this 
grace  that  our  Lord  had  done  in  his  passion 
sufficed  not  to  save  us  without  circumcision. 
Against  this  error  S.  Paul  and  Barnabas  with- 
stood vigorously,  and  showed  to  them  appertly 
that  the  grace  and  bounty  that  God  hath  done 
is  sufficient,  without  the  law,  to  our  salvation. 
After  they  sent  to  the  apostles  this  question,  the 
which  they  sent  anon  through  the  world  in  epistles 
against  this  foolish  error.  After,  S.  Barnabas  was 
right  strongly  well  ordained  against  his  neighbours, 
for  all  them  that  were  committed  to  his  cure  he 
nourished  and  fed,  in  word,  in  example  and  in 
benefits.  In  word,  for  he  pronounced  to  them 
the  holy  word  of  God  and  the  gospel.  Hereof  is 
said  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas  abode  in  Antioch  preaching  the  word  of 
God.  That  may  be  seen  by  the  great  multitude 
of  people  that  he  converted  in  the  city  of  Antioch, 
for  they  converted  so  much  people  there,  that  the 
disciples  lost  their  special  name  and  were  called 
Christian  men  as  the  other.  Yet  nourished  he 
them  that  he  had  charge  of  by  good  ensample,  for 
his  life  was  to  all  them  that  saw  him  as  a mirror 
of  holiness  and  the  exemplar  of  all  religion.  For 
he  was  in  all  his  works  noble  and  hardy,  and  well 
embellished  of  all  good  works,  and  was  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  enlumined  and  light  in  the  faith 
of  our  Lord.  All  these  four  things  be  touched 
of  him  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  yet  nourish- 
eth  he  them  by  benefits  in  two  manners,  that  is 
in  alms  temporal,  in  administering  to  the  poor 
their  necessity,  and  in  other  alms  spiritual,  in 
forgiving  all  rancour  and  evil  will.  The  first 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Life 
of  S. 

Barnabas 


2l8 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  alms  did  S.  Barnabas,  for  he  bare  to  such  as 
°fS.  were  in  right  great  poverty  and  misery,  that  as 
B&rmaMs  wag  needful  for  them  to  live,  for  after  that  we 
find  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  there  was  a great 
famine  in  the  time  of  Claudius  the  emperor,  which 
famine  had  Agabus  prophesied,  and  because  the 
disciples  that  would  return  to  their  brethren  into 
Judea,  sent  unto  the  most  ancient  their  alms  by 
the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  Paul.  The  second 
alms  did  S.  Barnabas  when  he  pardoned  his  anger 
to  John,  surnamed  Mark.  For  when  the  said 
John,  which  was  one  of  the  disciples,  was  departed 
from  the  company  of  Barnabas  and  of  Paul,  he 
repented  him,  and  would  return  to  them,  and 
Barnabas  forgave  it  him  and  took  him  again  to 
his  disciple,  but  Paul  would  not  receive  him  with 
him;  nevertheless  that  which  was  done  between 
them  both  was  by  good  intention,  for  in  this  that 
Barnabas  took  him  again,  we  may  see  the  sweet- 
ness of  his  pity,  and  in  this  that  S.  Paul  would 
not  receive  him,  is  showed  the  great  savour  of 
right  that  was  in  him,  after  that  the  gloss  saith, 
Acts  xv.,  because  this  John  had  been  tofore  the 
master  of  the  law  to  defend  the  law  of  Jesu  Christ, 
and  had  not  contained  him  vigorously  for  to  repress 
them,  but  had  been  negligent.  For  this  reason 
S.  Paul  would  not  accord  to  receive  him  in  to  the 
company  of  the  other.  Nevertheless  this  depart- 
ing that  John  was  thus  departed  from  the  company 
of  S.  Paul  and  from  the  other,  was  for  no  vice 
that  was  in  him,  but  for  the  sharpness  and  in- 
spiring of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  the  end  that  they 
might  preach  in  divers  places ; after  that  it  happed 
after.  For  when  Barnabas  was  on  a time  in  the 
city  of  Iconium,  a man  with  a clear  shining  visage 
appeared  by  night  to  this  John  aforesaid,  his 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


219 


cousin,  and  said  to  him  thus : John,  have  in  thee  The  Life 
no  doubtance,  but  be  strong  and  vigorous,  for  of  S. 
from  henceforth  thou  shalt  no  more  be  called  Barna^as 
John,  but  thou  shalt  be  called  right  high  en- 
hanced. And  when  he  had  told  this  to  his 
cousin  S.  Barnabas,  he  answered  and  said  to  him : 

Keep  thee  well  that  thou  tell  this  vision  to  no 
man,  for  in  the  same  form  he  appeared  to  me  that 
night  after. 

When  S.  Barnabas  and  S.  Paul  had  long 
preached  in  the  city  of  Antioch,  the  angel  of 
God  appeared  to  S.  Paul  and  said  to  him:  Go 
hastily  in  to  Jerusalem,  for  thou  shalt  find  there 
some  of  the  brethren  that  abide  thee.  Then 
Barnabas  would  go  in  to  Cyprus  to  visit  his  friends 
and  kin  that  were  there,  and  S.  Paul  would  go  to 
Jerusalem  5 thus  departed  that  one  from  that  other 
by  enticement  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  so  had 
ordained  it.  And  when  S.  Paul  had  showed  to 
S.  Barnabas  this  that  the  angel  said,  S.  Barnabas 
answered  to  him : The  will  of  God  be  done  like 
as  he  hath  ordained  it.  I go  now  into  Cyprus, 
and  more  hereafter  shall  I not  see  thee,  for  there 
shall  I end  my  life.  Then  he  humbly  kneeled 
down  and  fell  to  his  feet  weeping,  and  S.  Paul, 
which  had  compassion  of  him,  said  unto  him  these 
words  by  consolation : Barnabas,  weep  no  more, 
for  our  Lord  will  that  it  be  so,  our  Lord  hath 
appeared  to  me  this  night,  and  hath  said  to  me : 

Let  not  ne  give  none  empeshment  to  Barnabas  for 
to  go  into  Cyprus,  for  he  shall  there  enlumine 
many  folk  and  shall  suffer  there  martyrdom. 

On  a time  that  Barnabas  and  John  issued  out 
of  Cyprus  and  found  an  enchanter  named  Elymas, 
which  by  his  enchantment  had  taken  away  the 
sight  from  some  and  after  given  it  to  them  again. 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


220 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  he  was  much  contrary  to  them  and  would  not 
°f  S.  suffer  them  enter  into  the  temple.  After  this, 
fmmabas  garaaba8  8aw  on  a day  men  and  women,  being 
all  naked,  running  through  the  town,  and  made 
then  great  feast,  whereof  he  was  much  angry  and 
gave  his  malediction  and  curse  to  the  temple,  and 
suddenly  a great  part  thereof  fell  down  and  slew 
a great  part  of  the  people.  At  the  last  S.  Bar- 
nabas came  into  the  city  of  Salome,  but  this 
enchanter  aforesaid  moved  the  people  greatly 
against  him,  so  much  that  the  Jews  came  and 
took  him  and  led  him  through  the  city  with  great 
shame,  and  would  have  delivered  him  to  the  judge 
of  the  city  for  to  punish  him  and  to  put  him  to 
death.  But  when  they  heard  say  that  a great 
and  a puissant  man  was  come  in  to  the  city,  which 
was  named  Eusebius,  and  was  of  the  lineage  of 
the  emperor  Nero,  the  Jews  had  doubt  that  he 
would  take  him  out  of  their  hands  and  let  him 
go,  and  therefore  anon  they  bound  a cord  about 
his  neck,  and  drew  him  out  of  the  city,  and  there 
anon  burnt  him,  but  yet  the  felon  Jews  were  not 
satisfied  to  martyr  him  so,  for  they  took  the  bones 
of  him  and  put  them  in  a vessel  of  lead,  and  would 
have  cast  them  into  the  sea,  but  John,  his  disciple, 
with  two  other  of  his  disciples  went  by  night  into 
the  place  and  took  the  holy  bones  and  buried  them 
in  an  holy  place.  Then,  after  that  Sigbert  saith, 
they  abode  in  that  place  unto  the  time  of  the 
emperor  Zeno  and  Gelasius  the  pope,  that  was  the 
year  of  our  Lord  five  hundred.  After  that  then, 
as  S.  Dorotheus  said,  they  were  found  by  the 
revelation  of  S.  Barnabas  himself,  and  were  from 
thence  translated  in  to  another  place,  and  S. 
Dorotheus  saith  thus : Barnabas  preached  first  at 
Rome  of  Christ,  and  was  made  bishop  of  Milan. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


221 


Here  follow  the  Lives  of  SS.  Vitus  and  Modes tus, 
and  first  the  interpretation  of  their  names . 

Modestus  is  as  much  to  say  as  attemperate 
which  is  one  of  the  cardinal  virtues,  and  two 
extremities  go  round  about  every  virtue,  and  the 
virtue  abided  in  the  midst.  And  the  extremities  of 
wisdom  be  treachery  and  folly ; the  extremities  of 
attemperance  be  the  accomplishment  of  all  fleshly 
desires,  and  to  do  after  his  will ; the  extremities  of 
strength  be  feeble  courage  and  folly;  and  the 
extremities  of  justice  be  cruelty  and  default.  And 
therefore  Modestus  was  attemperate  by  means  of 
virtues  that  were  in  him.  Vitus  is  said  of  vita, 
that  is,  life.  S.  Austin,  in  libro  de  Trinitate, 
deviseth  of  three  manners  of  life,  that  is  the  life 
doing,  that  appertained  to  active  life ; a life  idle 
that  appertained  to  idleness ; and  a life  spiritual 
which  appertained  to  life  contemplative,  and  this 
great  manner  of  living  was  in  him.  Or  Vitus  is 
as  much  to  say  as  virtue  or  right  virtuous. 


Of  S.  Vitus  and  S.  Modestus . 

S.  Vitus  was  a child  much  noble  that  suffered 
martyrdom  in  the  age  of  twelve  years.  His  fader 
beat  him  oft,  because  he  despised  de  idols,  but 
neither  for  beating  ne  smiting  he  would  never 
worship  dem.  When  Valerian  de  provost  of 
Lucca  heard  say  hereof,  he  made  him  to  come 
tofore  him,  and  when  S.  Vitus  would  not  do  sac- 
rifice for  him  ne  for  his  words,  he  did  do  beat 
him  with  great  staves.  But  the  hands  of  them 
that  beat  him  became  dry  and  the  hands  of  the 
provost  also,  in  such  wise  that  dey  might  not 


The 

Lives  of 
Saints 
Vitus  and 
Modestus 


222 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  be  wield  them.  Then  said  the  provost : Alas ! 
k**®?  alas ! I have  lost  mine  hands.  Then  said  to  him 
Vitu^and  Vitus : Call  thy  gods  and  pray  them  that 

Modestus  they  help  thee  if  they  may.  Then  said  the 
provost : Mayst  thou  heal  me  ? The  child 

answered  : I may  well  heal  thee  in  the  name  of  my 
Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  anon  he  made  his  prayer 
and  healed  him.  Then  said  the  provost  to  his 
father : Chastise  thy  son,  to  the  end  that  he  die 
not  an  evil  death.  Then  his  father  brought  him 
again  to  his  own  house,  and  made  come  to  him 
harps,  pipes  and  all  manner  instruments  that  he 
might  have,  and  after  did  do  come  maidens  for  to 
play  with  him,  and  made  him  to  have  all  manner 
of  delights  that  he  might  get,  to  mollify  and 
change  his  heart.  And  when  he  had  been  shut 
and  enclosed  in  a chamber  one  day,  there  issued  a 
marvellous  odour  and  sweet  savour,  whereof  his 
father  and  the  meiny  marvelled,  and  when  the 
father  looked  in  to  the  chamber,  he  saw  two  angels 
sitting  by  his  son,  and  then  said  he : The  gods  be 
come  into  mine  house,  and  anon  after  these  words 
he  was  blind.  Then  assembled  all  the  city  of 
Lucca  at  the  cry  of  the  father,  and  the  provost 
Valerian  came  also,  and  demanded  what  it  was 
that  was  happed  to  him.  Ajid  he  said  to  him  : I 
have  seen  in  my  house  the  gods  all  so  shining  and 
bright  as  fire,  and  because  I might  not  suffer  the 
clearness,  I am  become  blind.  Then  led  they  him 
to  the  temple  of  Jove  and  promised  unto  him  a 
bull,  with  horns  of  gold,  for  to  have  again  his  sight. 
But  v/hen  he  saw  it  availed  him  nothing,  he  required 
his  son  that  he  would  pray  for  him,  and  anon  he 
made  his  prayer  unto  God,  and  anon  he  was  all 
whole.  Y et  for  all  that  he  would  not  believe  in  God, 
but  thought  how  he  might  put  his  son  to  death. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


223 


Then  appeared  the  angel  to  a servant  that  kept  The 
him,  whose  name  was  Modestus,  and  said  to  him : 

Take  this  child  and  lead  him  unto  a strange  land,  vftusand 
And  anon  he  found  a ship  ready  and  entered  Modestus 
therein,  and  so  went  out  of  the  country.  An  angel 
brought  meat  to  them,  and  he  did  many  miracles 
in  the  country  where  he  was. 

Now  it  happed  that  Diocletian,  son  of  the 
emperor,  had  a wicked  spirit  in  his  body,  and  said 
openly  that  he  would  not  go  out  till  the  child  of 
Lucca  named  Vitus  was  come.  Anon  he  sought 
all  about  the  country,  and  after,  when  he  was 
found,  he  was  brought  to  the  emperor.  Then  he 
demanded  if  he  might  heal  his  son  5 he  answered  : 

I shall  not  heal  him,  but  our  Lord  shall.  And 
anon  he  laid  his  hand  on  him  and  he  was  all 
whole,  so  that  the  devil  left  him.  Then  said 
Diocletian : My  child,  take  counsel  in  thy  works 
and  do  sacrifice  unto  our  gods  to  the  end  that  thou 
die  not  an  evil  death.  And  Vitus  answered  that 
he  would  never  do  sacrifice  to  their  gods,  and 
anon  he  was  taken  and  put  into  prison  with 
Modestus  his  servant,  and  they  laid  mill-stones 
upon  their  bodies.  And  anon  the  mill-stones  fell 
off,  and  the  prison  began  to  shine  of  great  light. 

And  when  it  was  told  to  the  emperor  they  were 
taken  out  of  prison,  and  after,  S.  Vitus  was  cast  in 
to  a lire  burning,  but  by  the  might  of  God  he 
issued  out  whole  and  safe  without  suffering  of  any 
harm.  Then  was  there  brought  a terrible  lion  for 
to  devour  him,  but  anon  by  the  virtue  of  the  faith 
he  became  meek  and  debonair.  After,  the  emperor 
made  him  to  be  hanged  on  a gibbet  with  Modestus 
and  Crescentia  his  nurse,  which  always  followed 
him.  Then  anon  the  air  began  to  trouble  and 
thunder,  the  earth  to  tremble,  the  temples  of  the 

VOL.  hi.  p 


Digitized  by  Google 


224 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  idols  to  fall  down  and  slew  many.  The  emperor 
^ qC?  was  afeard  and  smote  himself  on  the  breast  with 
Vitusand  ^8t  8aY'nS : Alas  • ^as  • a child  hath  overcome 
Modestus  me*  Then  came  an  angel  that  unbound  them  and 
they  found  themselves  by  a river,  and  there  resting 
and  praying  rendered  their  souls  unto  our  Lord 
God,  whose  bodies  were  kept  of  eagles,  and  after- 
ward, by  the  revelation  of  S.  Vitus,  a noble  lady 
named  Florentia  took  the  bodies  and  buried  them 
worshipfully.  They  suffered  martyrdom  under 
Diocletian  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  two  hundred 
and  eighty-seven. 

It  happed  afterward  that  a gentleman  of  France 
bare  away  the  heads  and  put  them  in  a church 
which  is  a mile  from  Lusarches,  named  Fosses,  and 
closed  them  in  a wall  unto  the  time  that  he  might 
set  them  more  honourably.  But  he  died  ere  he 
might  perform  it,  so  that  the  heads  were  there 
whereas  no  man  living  knew  where  they  were. 
It  happed  so  after,  that  there  was  certain  work  in 
that  church,  and  when  the  wall  was  broken  where 
the  heads  lay  and  were  discovered,  the  bells  of 
that  church  began  to  sound  by  themselves.  Then 
assembled  the  people  to  the  church  and  found  a 
writing  which  devised  how  they  had  been  brought 
thither,  and  then  they  were  laid  more  honourably 
and  set,  than  they  were  tofore ; and  there  then 
were  showed  many  miracles.  Then  let  us  pray  to 
these  glorious  saints  that  it  may  please  them  to  pray 
to  God  for  us  in  such  wise  that  we  may  by  their 
merits  and  prayers  come  to  the  glory  of  heaven,  to 
which  bring  us  the  Father  and  Son  and  Holy 
Ghost.  Amen. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


225 


Here  follow  the  Lives  of  SS.  Quirine  and  Juliet . 

Quirine  was  son  of  a noble  lady  of  Iconium, 
which  lady  would  flee  the  persecution,  and  she  J 
went  with  her  son  Quirine,  which  then  was  but 
three  years  old,  into  the  city  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia. 

And  she  was  there  presented  to  Alexander  the 
provost,  and  bare  her  child  in  her  arms,  which 
when  her  two  ehamberers  saw  that,  anon  they  fled 
and  left  her  alone.  Then  the  provost  took  the 
child  in  his  arms,  and  Juliet  his  mother  refusing  to 
do  sacrifice,  he  made  her  to  be  scourged  with  raw 
sinews.  And  when  the  child  saw  his  mother 
beaten  he  wept  bitterly  and  made  a lamentable 
noise,  but  the  provost  took  it  in  his  arms  and 
danced  it  upon  his  knees,  and  would  fain  please 
the  child  with  kissings  and  fair  words.  The 
child,  alway  beholding  his  mother,  abhorred  the 
kissings  of  the  provost,  and  turned  his  head  away 
from  him  with  great  indignation  and  scratched  his 
face  with  his  nails,  and  gave  his  cries  consonant 
unto  his  mother,  as  he  should  have  said : And  I 
am  also  Christian.  Then  he  bit  the  provost,  and 
wrestling  with  him  all  to-scratched  him.  Then 
the  provost,  having  indignation  hereof  and  in  a 
great  anger,  threw  down  the  child  off  the  steps 
whereas  he  sat  in  judgment,  that  the  tender  brain  • 
fell  abroad  out  of  his  head  upon  the  steps.  Then 
Juliet  seeing  her  son  go  to  heaven  tofore  her,  gave 
thankings  unto  God,  and  she  was  thereof  right 
glad.  Then  it  was  commanded  that  Juliet  should 
be  flayed,  and  burning  pitch  cast  on  her,  and  at 
the  last  her  head  to  be  smitten  off.  And  it  is 
found  in  another  legend  that  Quirine  despised  the 
tyrant  as  well  when  he  glosed  him  as  when  he 
blamed  him,  and  confessed  him  to  be  Christian, 


,y  Google 


226 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  howbeit  that  he  was  over-young  to  speak  but  the 
Life  of  Holy  Ghost  spake  in  him.  When  then  the 
S.  Marine  pr0V08t  demanded  of  him  who  had  so  taught  him, 
he  answered  and  said : O thou  provost  I marvel 
much  thy  folly  which  seest  me  so  young  of  age, 
not  being  yet  three  years  old,  and  demandest  who 
hath  taught  me  this  divine  wisdom ; thou  mayst 
clearly  see  that  it  cometh  from  God.  When  the 
child  was  beaten  he  cried ; I am  Christian ; and 
the  more  that  he  cried,  the  more  strength  among 
the  torments  he  received.  And  the  judge  did  do 
dismember  the  mother  with  the  child,  and  all 
to-hew  them  in  pieces,  and  because  their  members 
should  not  be  buried  of  the  Christian  people,  he 
commanded  that  they  should  be  cast  and  disperpled 
abroad.  But  notwithstanding  they  were  of  an 
angel  gathered  together,  and  in  the  night  buried  by 
the  Christian  people ; whose  bodies  were  showed  in 
the  time  of  Constantine  the  Great  when  peace  was 
in  the  Church,  by  a maid  which  had  been  one  of 
her  chamberers,  that  then  yet  lived,  and  were  had 
of  all  the  people  in  great  devotion.  They  suffered 
martyrdom  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  three 
hundred  and  thirty  under  Alexander. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  next  of  S . Marine . 

Marine  was  a noble  virgin  and  was  one  only 
daughter  to  her  father  without  brother  or  sister, 
and  after  the  death  of  her  mother,  her  father 
entered  into  a monastery  of  religion,  and  changed 
the  habit  of  his  daughter  so  that  she  seemed  and 
was  taken  for  his  son  and  not  a woman.  Then 
the  father  prayed  the  abbot  and  his  brethren  that 
they  would  receive  his  only  son,  whom  at  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


227 


instance  they  received  for  to  be  a monk  and  was  The 
called  of  them  all  brother  Marine.  He  began  to 
live  right  religiously,  and  to  be  much  obedient.  anne 
When  she  was  twenty-seven  years  and  her  father 
approached  towards  the  death,  he  called  his 
daughter  to  him,  confirming  her  in  her  good 
purpose  and  commanding  her  that  in  no  wise  she 
should  show  ne  do  be  known  that  she  was  a 
woman,  and  then  her  father  died.  She  went  oft- 
times  to  the  wood  with  the  cart  to  fetch  home 
wood,  and  because  it  was  far  from  the  monastery, 
otherwhile  she  lodged  in  a goodman’s  house 
whose  daughter  had  conceived  a child  by  a knight. 

And  when  it  was  perceived,  she  was  thereof 
examined,  who  had  begotten  that  child,  and  she 
said  that  it  was  the  monk  Marine  had  lain  by  her 
and  gotten  it.  And  then  anon  the  father  and 
mother  went  to  the  abbey  and  made  a great  com- 
plaint and  a great  clamour  to  the  abbot  for  his 
monk  Marine.  Then  the  abbot,  being  hereof  sore 
abashed,  sent  for  Marine  and  demanded  of  him 
why  he  had  done  so  horrible  a sin.  And  he 
meekly  answered  and  said : Holy  father,  I ask  of 
our  Lord  mercy,  for  I have  sinned.  Then  the 
abbot  hearing  this  was  much  angry  for  the  sorrow 
and  shame,  and  commanded  anon  that  he  should 
be  put  out  of  the  house.  And  then  this  Marine 
full  patiently  went  out  of  the  monastery,  and 
dwelled  at  the  gate  three  years,  and  lived  straitly 
with  a morsel  of  bread  a day.  And  when  the 
child  was  weaned  from  the  mother’s  pap,  it  was 
sent  to  the  abbot,  and  he  sent  it  to  Marine,  and 
bade  him  keep  such  treasure  as  he  had  brought 
forth.  And  then  he  took  meekly  and  patiently 
the  child  and  kept  it  with  him  there  two  years. 

All  these  things  he  took  in  great  patience,  and  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


228 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  Lives  all  things  gave  to  our  Lord  thankings ; and  at  the 
of  Saints  last  the  brethren  had  pity  on  him  and  considered 
GCnand  k's  humi%  an<^  patience,  and  did  so  much  to  the 
Prothase  abbot  that  he  was  taken  into  the  monastery,  and 
all  the  offices  that  were  most  foul  were  enjoined 
for  him  for  to  do.  He  took  it  all  gladly,  and  all 
things  he  did  patiently  and  devoutly,  and  at  the 
last,  being  full  of  virtuous  life,  she  died  and 
departed  out  of  this  world.  When  they  should 
take  up  the  body  and  wash  it  for  to  dispose  it  to 
be  buried  they  saw  that  she  was  a woman.  All 
they  were  astonied  and  feared,  and  knowledged 
that  they  had  trespassed  greatly  in  the  servant  of 
God.  Then  they  ran  all  for  to  see  the  sight,  and 
asked  forgiveness  of  their  ignorance  and  trespass. 
Then  bare  they  the  body  of  her  into  the  church 
and  there  honourably  they  buried  it.  Then  she 
that  infamed  the  servant  of  God  was  taken  and 
vexed  with  a devil,  and  knowledging  her  sin  came 
to  the  sepulchre  of  the  blessed  virgin,  and  there 
was  delivered  and  made  all  whole.  To  whose 
tomb  the  people  over  all  there  about  came  and 
assembled,  and  there  our  Lord  showed  many 
miracles  for  his  blessed  virgin  Marine.  She  died 
the  fourteenth  kalends  of  July. 


Here  follow  the  lives  of  SS.  Gervase  and  Prothase , 
and  first  of  the  interpretation  of  their  names . 

Gervase  is  said  of  gerar,  which  is  as  much 
to  say  as  a vessel,  or  holy,  or  of  gena,  that  is  to 
say  strange,  and  of  syor,  that  is  little,  for  he  was 
holy  by  merit  of  his  life ; a vessel  for  to  receive 
virtues  in  himself;  strange  by  despising  of  the 
World,  and  he  was  little  by  despising  of  himself. 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


229 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Prothase  is  said  of  prothos,  which  is  as  much  to  The  Lives 
say  as  first,  and  of  syos,  that  is,  divine.  Or 
Prothase  may  be  said  of  procul,  that  is,  far,  and  of 
stasis,  that  is,  set,  that  is  to  say  he  was  first  by  Prothase 
dignity,  he  was  divine  by  dilection,  and  far  set 
from  worldly  affection.  And  S.  Ambrose  found 
their  passion  written  in f a book  found  in  the 
sepulchre  at  their  head. 

Of  SS.  Gervase  and  Prothase . 

S.  Gervase  and  S.  Prothase  were  brethren  of 
one  burden  of  father  and  mother.  Their  father 
was  S.  Vital,  and  their  mother  the  blessed  Valery, 
which  gave  all  their  goods  unto  the  poor  for  the 
love  of  God,  and  dwelled  with  S.  Nazarine  which 
made  a right  fair  oratory  in  the  city  of  Hebredune. 

And  a child  named  Celsus  bare  to  him  the  stones, 
and  if  Nazarine  had  then  the  child  Celsus  or  not, 

I wot  never,  for  the  history  of  Nazarine  rehearseth 
that  Celsus  was  offered  to  him  long  after.  And 
when  they  were  offered  and  led  to  Nero  the 
emperor,  this  child  Celsus  followed  them  much 
sore  weeping,  and  one  of  the  knights  buffeted  and 
smote  him,  and  Nazarine  then  blamed  him.  Then 
the  knights  in  their  great  anger  beat  and  defouled 
Nazarine  under  their  feet,  and  after,  they  put  this 
Celsus  with  the  other  in  prison,  and  after  that 
they  threw  him  into  the  sea,  and  led  Gervase  and 
Prothase  to  Milan.  And  Nazarine  was  delivered 
by  miracle,  and  came  to  Milan.  In  that  time 
there  came  thither  the  earl  Astasius  which  went  in 
battle  against  them  of  Marcomannos  which  came 
against  him.  Then  the  keepers  of  the  idols  came 
to  him  and  said  that  their  gods  would  give  none 
answer  but  if  Gervase  and  Prothase  should  first 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


230 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  offer  to  them  and  do  sacrifice.  Then  anon  were 
of  Saints  they  brought  and  led  forth  for  to  sacrifice ; and 
“^uid  then  Gervase  said  that  all  the  idols  were  deaf  and 
Prothase  dumb,  and  that  he  should  require  help  of  Almighty 
God.  Then  the  earl  was  wroth  and  commanded 
him  to  be  beaten  with  scourges  of  lead  so  long  till 
he  gave  up  his  spirit,  and  so  suffered  death.  Then 
he  commanded  Prothase  to  be  brought  to  him,  to 
whom  he  said : Thou  cursed  wretch,  now  think  to 
save  thy  life  and  die  not  an  evil  death  with  thy 
brother.  To  whom  Prothase  said:  Who  is  a 
wretch?  I that  dread  thee  not,  or  thou  that 
dreadest  me?  To  whom  Astasius  said:  How 
should  I dread  thee,  wretch  ? To  whom  Prothase 
said : In  that  thou  dreadest  me,  that  thou  shouldest 
be  hurt  by  me  if  I make  not  sacrifice  to  thy  gods ; 
if  thou  dreaded  not  to  be  hurt  of  me  thou  wouldest 
never  compel  me  to  the  sacrifice  of  idols.  Then 
the  provost  commanded  him  to  be  hanged  on  a 
gibbet.  Then  said  Prothase  to  him : I am  not 
angry  with  thee,  for  I see  thine  eyes  of  thine  heart 
blinded,  and  I have  great  pity  of  thee  because 
thou  seest  not  what  thou  doest,  but  do  that  thou 
hast  begun,  that  this  day  the  benignity  of  our 
Saviour  may  bring  me  to  my  brother.  Then  the 
earl  commanded  him  that  his  head  should  be 
smitten  off,  and  thus  he  suffered  martyrdom  for 
our  Lord.  Philip,  a servant  of  Jesu  Christ,  with 
his  son,  took  the  bodies  and  buried  them  secretly 
in  his  house  in  a tomb  of  stone,  and  laid  a book  at 
their  heads  containing  their  nativity,  their  life,  and 
their  end. 

And  they  suffered  death  under  Nero  about  the 
year  of  our  Lord  fifty-six.  These  bodies  were 
hid  there  many  years,  but  in  the  time  of  S. 
Ambrose  they  were  found  in  this  manner. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


231 


S.  Ambrose  was  in  prayer  in  the  church  ofTheUves 
S.  Felix  and  S.  Nabor  in  such  wise  that  he  Saints 
neither  slept  ne  woke  wholly,  there  appeared  to 
him  two  young  men  clad  in  white  vestments  with  Prothase 
one  coat  and  mantel,  and  hosed,  and  they  appeared 
praying  with  him  with  their  hands  holden  up. 

Then  S.  Ambrose  prayed  that  if  it  were  illusion 
that  it  would  appear  no  more,  and  if  it  were 
truth  that  it  should  be  showed  him.  Then  when 
the  cock  crew,  the  younglings  appeared  to  him,  ador- 
ing with  him  in  semblable  manner,  and  at  the  third 
time  they  appeared  the  third  night  when  he  had  fasted 
and  slept  not.  And  with  them  appeared  S.  Peter 
the  apostle,  after  that  he  had  seen  him  in  painture. 

Then  the  younglings  said  nothing,  but  the  apostle 
spake:  These  be  they  that  desire  none  earthly 
thing,  but  have  followed  mine  admonishments,  and 
these  be  they  of  whom  thou  shalt  find  the  bodies 
in  such  a place,  and  there  thou  shalt  find  an  arch 
of  stones  covered  with  twelve  feet  of  earth,  and  thou 
shalt  find  at  their  heads  a little  book,  wherein  is 
contained  their  birth  and  their  end.  Then  S. 

Ambrose  called  all  his  neighbours  and  began  first 
to  dig  the  earth,  and  found  like  as  the  apostle  had 
said  to  him,  and  they  had  lain  in  that  place  well  a 
three  hundred  years,  and  they  were  as  fresh  as 
they  had  been  laid  there  that  same  hour;  and  a 
right  sweet  savour  issued  out  of  their  tomb ; and 
incontinent  a blind  man  touched  the  bier,  and  anon 
he  had  his  sight  again,  and  many  other  sick  people 
were  healed  by  the  merits  of  them,  and  in  their 
solemnity  peace  was  reformed  between  the  Lom- 
bards and  the  emperor  of  Rome.  And  then  S. 

Gregory,  the  pope,  established  for  the  introit  of 
the  mass  of  them : Loquitur  dominus  pacem,  and 
this  office  appertained  in  part  to  the  saints,  and  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


232 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  part  to  the  great  adventures  that  were  in  that  time. 
°Gervase  ^ust*n  rehearseth  in  the  book  of  the  City 

an<j  of  God  that  he  was  present,  and  the  emperor  and 
Prothase  much  great  company,  when  that  a blind  man 
received  his  sight  at  Milan  at  the  bodies  of 
Gervase  and  Prothase,  but  it  is  not  known 
whether  it  was  the  same  blind  man  or  no. 

Also  he  telleth  in  the  same  book  that  there  was 


a young  man  in  a town  named  Victorians  rode  his 
horse  into  a river  that  lay  thereby,  and  as  soon  as 
he  was  therein  the  devil  strangled  him  and  threw 
him  in  the  water  all  dead,  and  whiles  they  sang 
evensong  in  a church  of  S.  Gervase  and  Prothase, 
which  was  thereby,  he  was  so  smitten  with  the 
voices  of  them  that  sang  that  he  started  up  alive, 
and  in  a great  haste  he  entered  into  the  church  in 
a great  dread,  and  held  fast  by  the  altar  like  as  he 
had  been  bounden  thereto ; then  the  devil  menaced 


him,  and  said  if  he  would  not  come  thence  he 
would  break  all  his  members,  and  a little  while 


after,  by  the  merits  of  the  holy  martyrs  he  was 
plainly  healed.  And  S.  Ambrose  saith  in  his 
preface:  These  be  they  that  by  the  heavenly 
banner  took  the  arms  of  the  apostles  and  van- 
quished and  have  the  victory,  and  be  assoiled  from 
the  snares  of  the  world,  they  destroyed  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  fiend  and  followed  freely  without  any 
empeshment  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  like  unto  a 
debonair  fraternity  that  so  learned  the  holy  words 
that  no  filth  was  meddled  among  them.  O how 
glorious  a strife  was  this  that  causeth  them  both  to 
be  crowned  in  heaven  like  as  they  issued  out  of 
one  belly. 


X 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


*33 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S.  Edward^  of 

King  and  Martyr . Edward 

S.  Edward,  the  young  king- and  martyr,  was  the 
son  of  King  Edgar,  and  he  was  king  but  three 
years  and  seven  months,  and  when  his  own  mother 
was  dead,  his  father,  the  king,  wedded  another 
wife,  which  was  full  wicked,  and  by  her  he  had  a 
son  named  Ethelred.  This  queen  laboured  sore 
for  to  destroy  this  young  King  Edward  for  to 
make  her  own  son,  Ethelred,  king,  and  little 
loved  the  King  Edward.  For  then  King  Edgar 
was  dead  which  had  been  a good  justicer  in 
chastising  rebels  and  cherishing  good  and  well- 
disposed  people.  For  he  had  a blessed  and  an 
holy  man,  S.  Dunstan,  which  was  chief  of  his 
council  and  was  much  ruled  by  him,  and  in 
that  time  was  joy  and  mirth  in  all  England. 

And  the  queen,  through  enticing  of  the  fiend 
our  enemy,  laboured  ever  and  awaited  for  to 
destroy  this  young  King  Edward.  And  so  it 
happed  that  this  said  young  king,  Edward,  rode 
on  hunting  with  his  knights  in  the  wood  of  Dorset 
beside  the  town  of  Warham,  and  there  in  the  chase 
it  happed  the  king  to  depart  away  from  his  men, 
and  rode  forth  alone  to  see  his  brother  Ethelred 
which  was  thereby,  with  the  queen,  his  mother,  in 
the  castle  named  Corfe.  But  when  the  queen  saw 
him  there  being  alone,  she  was  joyful  and  glad 
in  her  heart,  hoping  then  to  accomplish  that  whicl 
she  sore  had  laboured  for,  and  went  to  the  king 
and  welcomed  him  with  fair  and  blandishing 
words,  and  commanded  to  fetch  bread  and  wine 
to  the  king,  and  whiles  the  king  drank,  the  butler 
took  a knife  and  roof  the  king  through  the  body 
to  the  heart,  in  such  wise  that  the  king  fell  down 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


234 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  dead.  And  anon  then  the  queen's  servants  buried 
°*  S.  the  body  in  a desolate  place  of  the  wood,  to  the 
Edward  en(j  nQ  man  8^]^  kn0w  where  he  was 
become.  And  when  S.  Dunstan  knew  that  the 
king  was  so  murdered,  he  made  much  great 
sorrow,  and  in  short  time  after,  yet  a part  against 
His  will,  he  crowned  her  son  Ethelred  king.  And 
then  he  said  to  the  king:  Forasmuch  as  by  man- 
slaughter and  wrong  thou  art  come  to  be  king, 
thou  shalt  therefore  have  great  sorrow  and  trouble 
to  thy  life's  end,  and  all  shall  fall  for  the  death  of 
thy  brother  Edward.  Who  that  will  know  the 
sorrow  that  fell  may  see  it  in  the  life  of  S. 
Alphage,  and  there  he  shall  see  what  sorrow 
there  fell,  and  all  was  for  the  death  of  this  S. 
Edward.  And  all  the  poor  people  of  this  land 
sorrowed  greatly  for  this  good  king's  death,  and 
in  especial  because  they  could  not  know  where  he 
was  buried.  For  they  would  bury  him  much 
worshipfully  if  they  might  find  him. 

And  in  a time,  as  God  would,  men  of  Warham 
and  of  the  country  be  gone  for  to  seek  this  holy 
body  of  S.  Edward  with  great  devotion,  praying 
our  Lord  that  they  might  have  knowledge  where 
the  holy  body  was,  and  soon  after,  one  of  them 
that  so  sought  saw  a great  light  in  a desolate  place 
of  the  wood  in  likeness  of  a pillar  of  fire,  stretching 
from  heaven  even  unto  the  grave  where  the  holy 
body  lay  in.  And  then  the  people  full  reverently 
digged  up  the  body  and  brought  it  with  solemn 
procession  to  the  church  of  Warham,  and  they 
buried  this  holy  body  in  the  churchyard  at  the 
east  end  of  the  church,  for  they  durst  not  do 
otherwise  for  displeasure  of  the  queen.  But  now 
over  that  grave  is  builded  a fair  chapel  of  our  Lady, 
and  in  the  place  where  he  was  first  buried  is  now 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


235 


a right  fair  well,  which  is  called  S.  Edward’s  The  Life 
well,  where  our  Lord  showeth  many  miracles  for  S. 
his  holy  martyr  S.  Edward.  And  in  likewise  in  “war 
the  chapel  at  Warham,  whereas  his  holy  body 
lay  long,  our  Lord  showeth  also  miracles.  But 
long  time  after,  by  the  labour  of  the  earl  Alphere 
which  much  loved  S.  Edward,  the  bishops  and 
clergy,  by  the  counsel  of  S.  Wilfrida  and  S. 

Edith,  sisters  of  S.  Edward  and  nuns  at  Wilton, 
the  holy  body  was  took  out  of  the  chapel  of 
Warham,  and  brought  with  great  solemnity  unto 
the  nunnery  of  Shaftesbury.  And  by  the  way,  as 
men  bare  this  holy  body,  two  cripples  were  made 
all  whole,  and  followed  the  holy  body  with  great 
joy  and  mirth,  thanking  God  and  the  holy  saint  of 
their  health.  And  when  they  came  to  Shaftes- 
bury they  laid  this  holy  body  in  the  wall  by  the 
high  altar  right  worshipful ly,  where  our  Lord 
showed  miracles  for  him.  And  when  the  queen, 
his  stepmother,  heard  tell  what  miracles  God 
showed  for  him,  then  she  repented  her  full  sore, 
and  cried  God  mercy,  and  the  holy  saint,  for  her 
trespass,  and  purposed  to  ride  thither  to  do  worship 
to  the  holy  body,  and  there  to  ask  forgiveness  of 
the  death  that  she  had  committed  to  be  done  in 
him.  But,  when  she  would  have  ridden  thither- 
ward, her  horse  would  not  go  forth  in  no  wise  for 
beating  ne  drawing;  and  then  she  lighted  down 
and  went  thither  full  meekly  on  her  feet ; and  oft 
in  her  journey  she  repented  her  of  that  cursed 
deed  that  she  had  caused  to  be  done  to  this  holy 
S.  Edward.  And  when  she  came  to  Shaftesbury, 
where  as  this  holy  body  was  buried,  she  did  full 
great  reverence  thereto,  and  cried  God  mercy,  and 
the  holy  saint,  for  her  great  offence.  And  after 
this  she  became  a full  good  woman,  and  had  great 


Digitized  by 


Google 


236 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  repentance  thereof  unto  her  life’s  end.  And  after, 
of  Saints  when  the  holy  body  had  rested  in  the  wall  certain 
andAm  years,  S.  Edward  appeared  to  an  holy  religious 
phiabel  man’  anc^  bade  him  go  to  Dame  Ethelreda,  abbess 
of  that  place,  and  say  to  her  that  she  purvey  that 
his  body  should  be  laid  in  a more  worshipful  place. 
And  then  she  went  to  S.  Dunstan  to  pray  him  of 
his  help  in  this  matter,  and  soon  after  S.  Dunstan 
came  with  a multitude  of  bishops,  abbots,  priors 
and  of  the  clergy,  and  took  up  this  holy  body  and 
laid  it  in  a worshipful  shrine,  which  the  abbess  and 
other  well-disposed  people  had  ordained  for  it. 
And  when  his  body  was  taken  out  of  the  wall, 
there  came  out  of  the  grave  a savour  like  a smoke 
of  frankincense,  smelling  so  sweet  that  all  the 
people  were  greatly  comforted  thereby.  And 
thus  this  holy  king  and  martyr  was  translated  in 
the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand,  and  somewhat 
more.  And  when  king  Ethelred  was  dead, 
Edward  his  son  reigned  after  him,  which  was  a 
holy  and  glorious  king  and  confessor,  and  lieth 
buried  at  Westminster,  and  worshipfiilly  shrined, 
whereas  our  Lord  hath  showed  many  a great 
miracle  for  him.  Then  let  us  pray  to  this  holy 
martyr  S.  Edward,  king,  and  to  S.  Edward,  king 
and  confessor  that  they  pray  to  our  Lord  for  us, 
that  we  may  in  this  wretched  world  so  amend  and 
repent  us  of  our  wretched  life,  that,  when  we  shall 
depart  hence  we  may  come  to  his  everlasting  life 
in  heaven.  Amen. 


Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S . Alban  and  of 
S.  AmphialeU 

After  that  Julius  Caesar,  the  first  emperor  of 
Rome,  had  divided  the  land  of  F ranee,  he  made 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


237 


a shipping  in  to  Great  Britain,  which  now  is  The  Lives 
called  England,  in  the  time  of  Cassibelaun,  king  ©f  Saints 
of  the  Britons.  And  twice  he  was  driven  out, 
and  the  third  time  by  the  help  of  one  Androgeus,  phiabel 
duke  of  Kent,  he  had  victory  and  conquered  the 
realm  and  subdued  it  to  Rome,  and  made  it  to 
pay  yearly  tribute,  and  ordained  and  stablished 
certain  statutes  in  this  land  which  were  long 
observed  and  kept.  Among  which  he  ordained 
that  none  of  this  land  should  receive  the  order  of 
knighthood,  but  only  at  Rome  by  the  hands  of  the 
emperor,  lest  peradventure  the  rude  people  and 
unworthy  would  take  upon  them  that  order  un- 
worthily, which  is  of  great  dignity,  and  also  they 
should  make  an  oath  never  to  rebel  qe  bear  arms 
against  the  emperor,  which  statutes  were  used  in 
all  places  obedient  to  Rome  and  under  their 
subjection.  Then  reigned  in  the  land  of  Britain, 
which  is  now  called  England,  a king  named 
Severus,  which  for  to  please  the  emperor  Dio- 
cletian, who  sent  his  son  that  hight  Bassianus  with 
many  other  lords’  sons,  of  Cornwall,  Wales,  Scot- 
land and  Ireland,  unto  the  number  of  a thousand 
five  hundred  and  forty,  among  which  was  a prince’s 
son  of  Wales  in  great  array  which  hight  Am- 
phiabel,  a goodly  young  man,  and  well  learned 
in  Latin,  French,  Greek,  and  Hebrew.  Also 
there  was  in  his  fellowship  a lord’s  son  of  the 
city  of  Verulam  named  Alban,  which  was  a well 
disposed  and  seemly  young  man,  and  discreet  in 
his  governance.  And  all  this  fellowship  came 
prosperously  to  Rome  in  the  time  when  Zephyrus 
was  pope  of  Rome,  which  saw  the  great  beauty  of 
this  young  company,  and  had  compassion  that  they 
were  not  Christian,  and  laboured  as  much  as  he 
might  to  convert  them  to  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


238 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  And  among  all  other  he  converted  the  prince's 
of  Saints  8(m  of  Wales,  Amphiabel,  and  baptized  him,  and 
andAif  ^n^orme<^  secretly  in  the  faith.  And  then  this 
phiabel  h°ly  Amphiabel  forsook  the  pomp  and  glory  of 
the  world,  and  took  on  him  wilful  poverty  for  the 
love  of  Jesu  Christ,  and  ever  after  continued  his 
life  in  perfection.  Also  there  were  many  other 
converted  at  that  time  whom  Diocletian  did  do 
seek,  but  none  could  he  find.  Then  he  ordained 
a day  in  which  these  young  men  should  receive 
the  order  of  knighthood  of  the  emperor's  hand; 
and  he  himself  girded  their  swords  about  them  and 
informed  them  the  rule  and  estate  of  the  order. 
And  when  all  the  ceremonies  were  done  longing 
to  the  order,  and  the  oath  sworn,  Bassanius,  son 
of  king  Severus,  desired  of  the  emperor  that  he 
might  prove  the  feats  of  knighthood  there  in 
jousting  and  tourneying,  which  was  granted  to 
him  and  greatly  allowed  for  his  manly  desire  and 
noble  request.  In  which  tourney  and  jousts 
Bassanius  and  his  fellowship  had  the  prize  and 
victory.  And  among  all  other,  Alban  was  the 
best  knight,  and  most  best  proved  in  strength, 
wherefore  he  had  a sovereign  name  tofore  all 
other,  whose  arms  were  of  azure  with  a saltire  of 
gold,  which  arms  afterward  bare  the  noble  king 
OfFa,  first  founder  of  the  monastery  called  S. 
Albans,  and  he  bearing  those  arms  had  ever 
glorious  victory,  and  after  his  death  he  left  those 
arms  in  the  monastery  of  S.  Alban.  Then,  when 
Bassanius  and  his  fellowship  had  long  sojourned 
in  Rome,  they  asked  licence  of  the  emperor  to 
return  home  into  Britain,  which  the  emperor 
granted  to  them  all,  save  to  Alban,  whom  for  his 
manliness  and  prowess  he  would  retain  for  to  be 
in  his  service  about  his  person,  and  so  he  abode 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


239 


with  him  there  seven  years.  And  after,  for  The  Lives 
divers  causes,  Maximian,  which  was  fellow  to  Saints 
Diocletian  was  sent  in  to  Britain  with  a great  army  ^ ^ 
for  to  subdue  the  rebels,  with  whom  Alban  came  phiabel 
and  was  ordained  prince  of  his  knights,  and  so 
entered  into  Britain  again.  In  that  time  S. 

Pontian  sat  in  the  see  at  Rome,  which  by  himself 
and  virtuous  men  that  preached,  and  by  showing 
of  miracles,  converted  unto  the  faith  of  Jesu 
Christ  and  christened  in  the  city  of  Rome  sixty- 
six  thousand  men.  And  when  the  emperor  heard 
hereof  he  assembled  all  the  senators  and  kings, 
princes  and  lords,  of  every  land  being  utider  the 
obeisance  of  Rome,  to  have  advice  how  he  might 
destroy  the  Christian  faith,  and  then  it  was  con- 
cluded that  the  pope  should  be  damned  with  all 
his  Christian  people,  and  be  punished  with  divers 
torments,  and  that  all  the  books  of  Christian  law 
should  be  burnt  and  churches  thrown  down,  and 
all  men  of  holy  church  to  be  slain  in  every  place. 

Which  ordinance  when  it  was  known  among  the 
Christian  people  of  Rome  of  divers  parts  of  the 
world,  then  they  went  and  departed  into  their 
own  country,  among  whom  S.  Am  phiabel,  which 
long  had  dwelt  at  Rome,  departed  and  came  home 
in  to  Britain  again  where  he  was  born,  and  so 
came  unto  Verulam  whereas  none  would  receive 
him  into  his  house,  and  he  walked  about  in  the 
streets  abiding  the  comfort  of  God.  And  then 
it  happed  he  met  with  Alban,  which  was  lord  of 
that  city  and  prince  of  the  knights,  and  steward 
of  the  land,  having  about  him  a great  multitude 
of  servants,  and  at  that  time  Alban  was  richly 
arrayed  with  clothes  fringed  with  gold,  to  whom 
all  the  people  did  great  worship.  Then  Am- 
phiabel,  which  had  left  the  arms  of  a knight  and 

VOL.  III.  Q 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


240 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  was  arrayed  like  a clerk,  knew  well  Alban,  but 
of  Saints  Alban  knew  him  not,  how  be  it  they  had  been 
tofore  both  in  one  fellowship,  and  desired  and 
^hiabel  Praye(^  Alban  of  harbour  for  the  love  of  God, 
which  Alban  without  feigning,  as  he  that  always 
loved  to  do  hospitality,  granted  him  harbour  and 
well  received  him,  and  gave  to  him  meat  and 
drink  necessary  for  him.  And  after,  when  his 
servants  were  departed,  he  went  unto  this  pilgrim 
secretly,  and  said  to  him  in  this  wise : How  is 
it,  said  he,  that  thou  art  a Christian  man  and 
comest  in  to  these  parts  unhurt  of  the  gentiles? 
To  whom  S.  Amphiabel  said:  My  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  the  son  of  the  living  God,  hath  surely  con- 
ducted me  and  hath  kept  me  by  his  power  from 
all  perils.  And  that  same  Lord  hath  sent  me  in 
to  this  land  to  preach  and  denounce  to  the  people 
the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ,  to  the  end  that  they 
should  be  made  people  acceptable  to  him.  To 
whom  Alban  said : What  is  he  that  is  the  son  of 
God  whom  ye  affirm  to  be  Jesu  Christ  and  son 
of  the  virgin  ? These  be  new  things  to  me,  tor  I 
have  not  heard  of  them  5 I would  fain  know  what 
Christian  men  feel  thereof.  Then  Amphiabel  ex- 
pounded to  him  and  declared  our  faith  and  belief, 
in  which  anon  Alban  disputed  again  and  said  that 
by  reason  it  might  not  be,  and  so  departed  from 
him.  And  the  next  night  after,  S.  Alban  saw  in 
his  dream  all  the  mystery  of  our  faith,  as  well  how 
the  second  person  of  the  Trinity  came  down  and 
took  our  nature  and  became  man  and  suffered  death, 
and  of  his  resurrection  and  ascension,  whereof 
he  was  greatly  troubled,  and  came  on  the  morn 
to  Amphiabel  and  told  him  what  he  had  dreamed. 
And  then  S.  Amphiabel  thanked  our  Lord,  and 
so  informed  him  in  the  faith  that  S.  Alban  was 


Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


241 


steadfast  in  the  belief  of  Jesu  Christ  and  thus  kept 
his  master  Amphiabel  in  his  house  six  weeks  and 
more,  and  always  in  a place  named  Tigurium,  they 
held  their  holy  communication,  so  long  till  at  the 
last  they  were  espied  and  complained  on  unto  the 
judge.  Wherefore  the  judge  sent  for  Alban  and 
for  the  clerk,  and  because  the  clerk  should  go  in 
to  Wales,  S.  AJban  did  do  clothe  him  like  a 
knight,  and  led  him  out  of  the  town,  and  departed 
with  many  tears,  and  commended  each  other  to 
our  Lord.  And  after,  S.  AJban  was  sent  for, 
which  came  having  on  him  the  clerk’s  array  and 
clothing,  bearing  a cross  and  an  image  of  our 
Lord  hanging  thereon,  to  the  end  that  they  should 
know  verily  that  he  was  a Christian  man.  And 
the  men  that  came  for  him  drew  him  cruelly  to 
the  judge  Askepodot,  and  when  the  paynims  saw 
him  bear  the  sign  of  the  cross,  which  was  unknown 
to  them,  they  were  sore  troubled  and  afraid. 
Then  the  cruel  judge  demanded  him  whose  ser- 
vant he  had  been,  and  of  what  kindred,  and 
because  he  would  not  tell  he  was  much  wroth, 
but  among  many  questions  he  told  him  that  his 
name  was  Alban  and  that  he  was  a very  Christian 
man.  Then  the  judge  demanded  him  where  the 
clerk  was  that  entered  in  to  the  city,  now  late, 
speaking  of  Christ:  He  is  come  for  to  beguile 
and  deceive  our  citizens,  know  ye  well  he  would 
have  come  unto  our  presence  but  that  his  conscience 
hath  removed  him,  and  hath  mistrust  in  his  cause, 
and  guile  and  falseness  is  hid  under  his  doctrine. 
Thou  mayest  well  know  and  evidently  understand 
that  thou  hast  given  thy  consent  to  a foolish  man, 
wherefore  forsake  his  doctrine  and  repent  thee, 
and  make  satisfaction  for  thy  trespass  in  doing 
sacrifice  to  our  gods,  and  that  done  thou  shalt 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Lives 
of  Saints 
Alban 
and  Am- 
phiabel 


242 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  not  only  have  forgiveness  of  thy  sins,  but  thou 
of  Saints  8halt  have  towns  and  provinces,  men,  gold  and 
an^Am*  power.  Then  said  Alban  to  the  judge : O thou 
phiabei  judge  • the  words  and  menaces  that  thou  hast 
spoken  be  but  vain  and  superfluous.  It  is  openly 
known  that  this  clerk,  if  it  had  thought  him  good 
and  profitable,  and  also  if  our  both  hearts  had 
accorded  thereto,  he  had  come  to  thine  audience, 
but  I would  not  assent  thereto,  knowing  that  this 
people  is  ever  ready  to  do  evil.  I acknowledge 
that  I have  received  his  doctrine  and  repent  me 
nothing  thereof,  for  the  faith  that  I have  received 
restoreth  the  feeble  and  sick  to  their  health,  for 
the  deed  proveth  it.  This  faith  is  more  dear  to 
me  than  all  the  riches  that  thou  promisest  me,  and 
more  precious  than  all  the  worship  that  thou 
purposest  to  give  me,  for  shortly,  your  gods  be 
false  and  failing,  for  they  that  most  basely  serve  [ 
them  be  most  wretchedly  deceived.  Then  came 
anon  forth  a great  multitude  of  paynims,  and  with 
force  and  strength  would  compel  him  to  do  sacrifice, 
and  commanded  him  to  offer  to  the  gods,  but  in 
no  wise  he  would  not  consent  to  their  cursed  rites. 
And  by  the  commandment  of  the  judge  he  was 
taken  and  stretched  abroad  to  be  scourged,  and 
as  he  was  grievously  beaten  he  turned  him  to  our 
Lord  with  a glad  visage,  and  said  : My  Lord  Jesu 
Christ,  I beseech  thee  keep  my  mind  that  it  move 
not  ne  that  it  fall  from  the  estate  that  thou  hast 
set  it  in,  for,  Lord,  with  all  my  heart  I offer  my  | 
soul  to  thee  in  very  sacrifice,  and  I desire  to  be 
made  thy  witness  by  shedding  of  my  blood. 
These  words  sounded  he  among  his  beatings,  and 
the  tormentors  beat  him  so  long  that  their  hands 
waxed  weary;  and  the  people  hoped  that  S. 
Alban  would  change  his  purpose,  and  therefore 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


243 


he  was  kept  under  the  governance  of  the  judge  The  Lives 
six  weeks  and  more,  and  all  that  time  the  elements  ^Saints 
bare  witness  of  the  injury  done  to  holy  Alban, 
for  from  the  time  of  his  taking  unto  the  time  phiabel 
that  he  was  delivered  from  the  bonds  of  his  flesh 
there  came  never  dew  nor  rain  upon  the  earth, 
but  burning  heat  of  the  sun,  and  also  in  the  nights 
all  that  time  was  insufferable  heat,  so  that  neither 
trees  ne  fields  brought  forth  no  fruit,  and  thus  the 
elements  fought  for  this  holy  man  against  the 
wicked  men.  And  the  judge  Askepodot  dreaded 
for  to  slay  him  because  of  the  great  love  that  the 
emperor  had  to  him,  and  for  reverence  of  his 
dignity,  and  power  of  his  kindred,  unto  the  time 
that  he  had  informed  Diocletian  of  his  conversa- 
tion. And  when  the  emperor  had  seen  the  letters, 
anon  Maximian  came  into  Britain  for  to  destroy 
the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ,  and  was  commanded  that 
no  Christian  man  should  be  spared,  save  only  Alban, 
whom  they  should  entreat  to  pervert  him  by  fair 
promises  and  to  fear  him  by  menaces,  and  so  to 
compel  him  to  turn  again  to  their  sect.  And  if 
he  would  in  no  wise  leave  the  Christian  faith,  then 
he  to  have  capital  sentence,  and  be  beheaded  by 
some  knight  for  the  worship  of  the  order  of 
knighthood,  and  the  clerk  that  converted  him  to 
suffer  the  foulest  death  that  could  be  imagined, 
that  the  beholders  thereof  may  have  dread  and 
horror  of  semblable  pains. 

And  when  Maximian  came  into  Britain,  he 
took  with  him  the  king  Askepodot  and  went 
straight  to  the  city  of  Verulam  for  to  fulfil  the 
commandment  of  the  emperor.  And  then  S. 

Alban  was  brought  forth  tofore  them  out  of  prison, 
and,  by  all  the  ways  that  they  could  imagine,  they 
attempted  to  pervert  him,  but  the  holy  man  was 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/ 


244 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  constant  and  firm  in  the  faith,  whereot  they,  having 
of  Saints  indignation,  ordained  a day  of  justice,  which  day 
onc^Am-  come»  t^iey  £ave  sentence>  first  on  Amphiabel,  that 
phiabel  wherever  he  was  found  he  should  be  scourged, 
and  after  bounden  to  a stake  all  naked,  and  then 
his  navel  be  opened  and  his  bowels  to  be  fastened 
by  that  one  end  to  the  stake,  and  he  then  to  be 
driven  to  go  round  about  the  stake  till  all  his 
bowels  were  wounden  out  about  the  stake,  and 
after  to  have  his  head  smitten  off,  and,  as  touching 
S.  Alban,  they  gave  sentence  that  he  should  be 
beheaded,  which  sentences  were  given  under 
writing.  Then  all  the  burgesses  of  Verulam,  of 
London,  and  other  towns  about,  were  summoned 
to  come  the  next  Thursday  following  for  to  hear 
the  judgment,  and  see  the  execution  upon  Alban, 
prince  of  knights,  and  steward  of  Britain.  At 
which  day  came  people  without  number  for  to  see 
this  said  execution.  And  then  was  Alban  brought 
out  of  prison,  whom  they  desired  to  make  sacrifice 
to  Jupiter  and  Apollo,  which  utterly  refused  it, 
but  preached  the  faith  of  Christ,  that  he  converted 
much  people  to  be  christened.  Then  Maximian 
and  Askepodot  gave  final  sentence  on  him,  thus 
saying : In  the  time  of  the  emperor  Diocletian, 
Alban,  lord  of  Verulam,  prince  of  knights,  and 
steward  of  all  Britain  during  his  life,  hath  despised 
Jupiter  and  Apollo,  our  gods,  and  to  them  hath 
done  derogation  and  disworship,  wherefor  by  the 
law  he  is  judged  to  be  dead  by  the  hand  of  some 
knight,  and  the  body  to  be  buried  in  the  same 
place  where  his  head  shall  be  smitten  off,  and  his 
sepulchre  to  be  made  worshipfully  for  the  honour 
of  knighthood,  whereof  he  was  prince,  and  also 
the  cross  that  he  bare  and  sklavin  that  he  ware 
should  be  buried  with  him,  and  his  body  to  be 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


245 


closed  in  a chest  of  lead  and  so  laid  in  his  The  Lives 
sepulchre.  This  sentence  hath  the  law  ordained 
because  he  hath  renied  our  principal  gods.  Then 
arose  a great  murmur  among  the  people,  and  said  phiabel 
that  they  ought  not  to  suffer  such  injury  done  to 
so  noble  and  so  good  a man,  and  specially  his 
kindred  and  friends,  which  laboured  full  sore  for 
his  deliverance,  whereof  Alban  was  afeard  to  be 
delivered  from  his  passion  at  their  request  and 
instance,  and  stood  up  holding  the  cross,  looking 
towards  heaven  and  saying : Lord  Jesu  Christ,  I 
beseech  thee  that  thou  suffer  not  the  fiend  to 
prevail  against  me  by  his  deceits,  and  that  the 
people  let  not  my  martyrdom.  And  then  he 
turned  to  the  people  saying  : Wherefore  tarry  ye 
and  lose  the  time,  and  why  execute  ye  not  on  me 
the  sentence?  For  I let  you  wit  I am  a great 
enemy  to  your  gods,  which  have  no  power  ne  may 
do  no  thing,  ne  hear,  ne  see,  ne  understand,  to 
whom  none  of  you  would  be  like.  O what  vanity, 
and  what  blindness  is  among  you  to  worship  such 
idols,  and  will  not  know  Jesu  Christ  the  only  son 
of  God  and  his  very  true  law.  Then  the  paynims 
spake  together  and  assented  that  he  should  be  put 
to  death,  and  they  chose  a place  where  he  should 
be  executed  named  Holmeshurst.  But  then  arose 
a contention  among  the  people  what  death  he 
should  suffer.  Some  would  have  him  crucified 
like  as  Christ  was,  and  others  would  have  him 
buried  quick,  but  the  judge  and  the  people  of  the 
city  would  have  him  beheaded  according  to  the 
commandment  of  the  emperor,  and  so  he  was  led 
forth  towards  his  martyrdom,  and  all  the  people 
to  the  place  following  this  holy  man  with  despitous 
words  and  rebukes,  whereto  the  blessed  man  Alban 
answered  no  word,  but  meekly  and  patiently 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


246 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  suffered  all  their  reproofs,  and  the  people  were 
°*  faints  80  great  a multitude  that  they  occupied  all  the 
and  Am?  place>  which  was  large  and  great.  And  the  heat 
phiabel  °f  t^ie  sun  was  so  great  that  it  burnt  and  scalded 
their  feet  as  they  went,  and  so  they  led  him  till 
they  came  to  a swift  running  river,  where  they 
might  not  lightly  pass  for  press  of  people,  for  many 
were  shifted  over  the  bridge  into  the  water  and 
were  drowned,  and  many,  because  they  might  not 
go  over  the  bridge  for  press,  unclothed  them  for 
to  swim  over  the  river,  and  some  that  could  not 
swim  presumed  to  do  the  same,  and  were  wretchedly 
drowned,  whereof  was  a great  rumour  and  noise 
piteously  among  the  people.  And  when  S.  Alban 
perceived  this  thing  he  bewailed  and  wept  for  the 
harm  and  death  of  his  enemies  that  so  were 
perished,  and  kneeled  down  holding  his  hands  up 
to  God  beseeching  that  the  water  might  be  lessed 
and  the  flood  withdrawn  that  the  people  might  be 
with  him  at  his  passion,  and  forthwith  God  showed 
at  the  request  of  S.  Alban  a fair  miracle,  for  the 
water  withdrew,  and  the  river  dried  up  in  such 
wise  that  the  people  might  safely  go  dry  foot  over 
the  river,  and  also  by  the  prayer  of  this  holy  man, 
they  that  tofore  had  been  drowned  were  restored 
again  to  life,  and  were  found  alive  in  the  deepness 
of  the  river.  And  then  one  of  the  knights  that 
drew  S.  Alban  toward  his  martyrdom,  saw  these 
miracles  that  God  showed  for  him,  and  anon  threw 
away  his  sword  and  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  S. 
Alban,  saying : I knowledge  to  God  mine  error 
and  demand  forgiveness,  and  wept  sore  and  said : 
O Alban,  servant  of  God,  for  verily  thy  God  is 
almighty  and  there  is  none  God  but  he,  and  there- 
fore I knowledge  me  to  be  his  servant  during  my 
life,  for  this  river  by  thy  prayers  is  made  dry, 


,y  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


247 


wherefore  I bear  witness  that  there  is  no  god  but 
thy  God  which  doeth  such  miracles.  And  when 
he  had  said  thus,  their  fury  and  woodness  increased 
and  said  to  him : Thou  art  false  for  it  is  not  as 
thou  sayest  nor  as  thou  affirmest,  for  this  river  is 
thus  dried  by  the  benignity  of  our  gods,  and  there- 
fore we  worship  Jupiter  and  Apollo  which  for  our 
ease  have  taken  up  this  water  by  this  great  heat ; 
and  because  thou  takest  away  the  worship  of  our 
gods  and  rewardest  it  to  other  by  evil  inter- 
pretation, thou  hast  deserved  the  pain  which 
longeth  to  a blasphemer.  And  then  forthwith 
they  drew  out  his  teeth  of  his  head,  and  the  holy 
mouth  that  had  borne  witness  of  truth  was 
grievously  beaten  with  60  many  of  them  that,  ere 
they  left  they  tare  all  the  members  of  his  body  and 
to-brake  all  his  bones,  and  all  to-rent  his  body,  and 
left  him  lying  upon  the  sand.  But  who  might 
without  weeping  of  tears  express  how  this  holy 
man  Alban  was  drawn  and  led  through  briars  and 
thorns  and  sharp  stones,  that  the  blood  in  his  feet 
coloured  the  way  as  they  went  in  and  the  stones 
were  bloody  ? Then  at  the  last  they  came  to  the 
hill  where  this  holy  Alban  should  finish  and  end 
his  life,  in  which  place  lay  a great  multitude  of 
people  nigh  dead  for  heat  of  the  sun  and  for  thirst, 
and  when  they  saw  Alban  they  grinded  with  their 
teeth  on  him  for  anger,  saying : O thou  most 
wicked  man,  how  great  is  thy  wickedness  that 
makest  us  to  die  with  thy  sorcery  and  witchcraft 
in  this  great  misery  and  heat.  Then  Alban,  having 
pity  on  them,  sorrowed  by  great  affection  for  them 
and  said : Lord,  that  madest  man’s  body  of  earth, 
and  his  soul  unto  thy  likeness,  suffer  not  these 
creatures  to  perish  for  any  cause  committed  in  me, 
and  blessed  Lord  make  the  air  attemperate  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Lives 
of  Saints 
Alban 
and  Am- 
phiabel 


248 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  send  them  water  to  refresh  them.  And  then  anon 
°*  ^Alhft8  w*n(^  blew  afresh  cool,  and  also  at  the  feet  of 

andAm^  holy  man  Alban,  sprang  up  a fair  well,  whereof 

phiabel  all  the  people  marvelled,  to  see  the  cold  water 
spring  up  in  the  hot  sandy  ground,  and  so  high  on 
the  top  of  an  hill,  which  water  flowed  all  about, 
and  in  large  streams  running  down  the  hill.  And 
then  the  people  ran  to  the  water  and  drank,  so 
that  they  were  well  refreshed,  and  thus  by  the 
merits  of  S.  Alban  their  thirst  was  clean  quenched. 
But  yet,  for  all  the  great  goodness  that  was  showed, 
they  thirsted  strongly  the  blood  of  this  holy  man 
and  his  death,  and  gave  the  praising  and  laud  to 
their  gods,  and  took  this  holy  man,  and  bound  him 
first  to  a stake,  and  after,  hung  him  on  a bough  by 
the  hair  of  his  head,  and  sought  among  the  people 
one  to  smite  off  his  head ; and  then  a cruel  man 
was  ready,  and  in  an  anger  took  his  sword  and 
smote  off  the  head  of  this  holy  man  at  one  stroke, 
that  the  body  fell  to  ground  and  the  head  hung 
still  on  the  bough,  and  the  tormentor,  as  he  had 
smitten  off  his  head,  both  his  eyes  started  out  of  his 
head,  and  the  wretch  might  in  no  wise  be  restored 
again  to  his  sight.  Then  many  of  the  paynims 
said  that  this  vengeance  came  of  great  righteousness. 
Then  the  knight  which  was  left  for  dead  upon 
the  sand  a little  before,  enforced  himself  as  much 
as  he  might,  and  crept  upon  his  hands  unto  the 
top  of  the  hill  whereas  S.  Alban  was  beheaded. 
And  the  judge  seeing  him  began  to  scorn  him, 
and  all  the  miracles  that  had  been  shown  by  S. 
Alban,  and  said  to  him : O thou  lame  and  crooked, 
now  pray  to  thine  Alban  that  he  restore  thee  to 
thy  first  health,  run  and  hie  thee  and  take  the 
head  by  which  thou  mayst  receive  thine  heal,  why 
tarricst  thou  so  long  ? Go  and  bury  his  body  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


249 


do  him  service.  Then  this  knight,  burning  in  The  Lives 
charity,  said : I believe  firmly  that  this  blessed 
Alban  by  his  merits  may  get  to  me  perfect  health,  ^m. 
and  get  to  me  of  our  Lord  that  which  ye  say  in  phiabel 
scorn.  And  when  he  had  thus  said  he  took  and 
embraced  the  holy  head  in  his  arms,  and  reverently 
loosed  it  from  the  bough,  and  set  it  fair  to  the 
body  and  by  the  miracle  of  our  Lord  he  was  forth- 
with restored  to  his  first  health  and  forthwith 
began  to  preach  the  great  power  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  and  of  the  merits  of  S.  Alban,  and 
then  he  was  stronger  to  labour  than  ever  he  was 
tofore,  whereof  he  gave  than  kings  and  laud  to 
God  and  to  this  holy  martyr  S.  Alban.  And 
there  in  the  same  place  he  buried  the  holy  body, 
and  laid  a fair  tomb  over  him,  and  afterwards  the 
paynims  took  this  knight  and  bound  him  to  a 
stake,  and  after  smote  off  his  head  that  same  day, 
and  after,  the  judge  gave  licence  to  the  people  to 
depart  and  go  home.  And  the  night  after  was 
seen  a clear  beam  coming  down  from  heaven  to 
the  sepulchre  of  S.  Alban,  by  which  angels 
descended  and  ascended  all  the  night  during, 
singing  heavenly  songs,  among  which  this  song 
was  heard:  Alban  the  glorious  man  is  a noble 
martyr  of  Jesu  Christ.  And  the  people  came  to 
behold  this  sight,  wherefore  many  were  turned 
from  their  false  belief  and  believed  in  Jesu  Christ, 
and  many  of  them  soon  after  went  into  Wales  for 
to  seek  Amphiabel  for  to  be  baptized  and  informed 
in  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ,  and  there  they  found 
him  preaching  the  word  of  God.  And  then  they 
told  him  how  that  Alban  was  martyred,  and  for  a 
token  they  brought  the  cross  which  he  held  in  his 
hand,  and  was  yet  bloody  of  his  blood,  whereby 
he  might  evidently  know  that  he  had  suffered 


Digitized  by 


Google 


250 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives 
of  Saints 
Alban 
and  Am- 
phiabel 


death,  whereof  this  holy  man  gave  laud  and  I 
thankings  to  our  Lord,  and  made  then  unto  them  f 
a noble  sermon  in  such  wise  as  all  that  people  that  ™ 
came  from  Verulam  were  baptized  and  received 
the  faith.  And  soon  after,  the  judge  had  knowledge  * 
of  the  departing  of  this  people  from  the  city,  and 
were  gone  into  Wales  to  receive  the  faith  of 
Amphiabel,  S.  Alban’s  master,  whereof  he  was 
much  angry  and  sore  moved  and  enquired  of  the 
number  of  them  that  were  gone,  and  he  found  a 
thousand  and  more  whose  names  were  written,  and 
then  he  ordained  a multitude  of  people  well  armed 
and  in  defence  for  to  seek  Amphiabel  and  those 
people  that  were  gone  to  him ; which  went  in  to 
Wales,  and  there  found  all  these  people  awaiting 
on  Amphiabel  and  hearing  him  preach  the  word 
of  God ; to  whom  one  of  them  that  were  so  sent, 
said  to  Aonphiabel:  O thou  deceiver  and  most 
wicked  of  all  men,  why  hast  thou  deceived  this 
people  with  thy  deceivable  preaching,  stirring  them 
to  forsake  our  true  laws  and  gods?  CommancL 
them  to  leave  their  error  and  to  return  home  again* 
to  our  city,  and  if  thou  do  not  we  shall  slay  all 
of  them  and  bring  thee  to  our  city  there  to  be 
tormented  to  the  death.  To  whom  one  of  the 
Christian  men  said : Certainly  this  man  is  the  very 
true  servant  of  God,  for  whom  God  doeth  and 
showeth  daily  miracles,  and  we  all  knowledge  us 
all  to  be  very  true  Christian  men,  and  be  ready  for 
the  love  of  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  to 
suffer  death,  for  to  have  therefor  our  reward  in 
heaven,  everlasting  joy  and  bliss,  and  counsel  you 
to  be  baptized  and  to  receive  the  faith  of  Christ. 
And  when  the  paynims  heard  thiB,  they  in  a great 
fury  ran  upon  all  that  blessed  company  and  cruelly 
slew,  which  gladly  offered  themselves  to  suffer 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


251 

death  for  our  Lord.  There  the  father  slew  the  The  Live# 
son  and  the  son  the  father,  brother  slew  brother, 
and  cousins  their  cousins.  Then  the  holy  man 
Amphiabel,  seeing  this  blessed  company  thus  phiabel 
cruelly  put  to  death,  recommended  their  souls  to 
almighty  God,  and  then  the  tormentors  took 
Amphiabel,  and  sware  by  their  gods  that  they 
would  bring  him  to  Verulam  quick  or  dead,  and 
bound  his  hands  behind  him  fast,  and  drew  him 
forth  going  afoot,  and  they  riding,  that  his  feet 
bled  grievously,  till  they  came  to  the  place  where 
S.  Alban  was  buried. 

And  by  the  way  there  was  a sick  man  which 
was  going  from  Verulam  toward  Amphiabel  for  to 
receive  the  faith,  and  he  cried  to  Amphiabel  for 
to  be  relieved  of  his  sickness,  whom  the  paynims 
scorned,  and  Amphiabel,  by  the  name  of  our  Lord, 
made  him  all  whole ; and  his  bonds  that  his  hands 
were  bound  with  were  loosed,  whereof  some  of  the 
paynims  glorified  our  Lord.  They  said  that 
. Amphiabel  was  brought  and  should  come,  whereof 
they  of  the  city  were  glad,  and  supposed  he  should 
have  forsaken  his  faith,  but  the  tormentors  took 
and  bound  him ; notwithstanding  that,  he  always 
preached  the  word  of  God.  And  one  of  them 
told  to  them  how  that  their  friends  were  slain,  and 
what  miracles  God  showed  for  them  at  their  death, 
in  such  wise  that  many  were  converted  to  the  faith. 

And  the  people  ran  out  of  the  city  to  the  place 
whereas  this  holy  man  was  and  stood,  which  was 
at  that  tomb  of  S.  Alban.  And  one  of  those 
tormentors,  in  a great  fury  took  this  holy  man  and 
bound  him  fast,  and  after,  opened  his  navel  and 
took  out  one  end  of  his  bowels,  and  fastened  it  to 
a stake  which  he  pight  in  the  ground,  and  made 
the  holy  man  to  go  round  about  the  stake,  and 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


252 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Lives  drove  him  with  whips,  and  beat  him  till  that  his 
°*  /Ston  k°we^8  were  wounden  out  of  his  body.  And  in 
and  Am-  ^ Pa^n  t^ie  holy  man  gave  no  token  of  sorrow 
phhU>el  Be  of  disease.  And  then  in  their  woodness  they 
ran  upon  him  with  spears  and  swords  to  compel 
him  to  run  about  till  all  were  drawn  out,  which 
was  a marvel  to  the  people  that  he  so  patiently 
might  endure  such  grievous  torments  so  long, 
wherefore  many  of  them  forsook  their  idols  and 
became  Christian.  And  when  the  judge  saw  and 
knew  that  the  people  were  become  Christian,  he 
commanded  to  slay  them  incontinent,  and  so  there 
were  slain  to  the  number  of  a thousand  people, 
which  Amphiabel  saw,  and  thanked  God,  recom- 
mending to  him  their  souls.  And  then  the 
tormentors,  seeing  yet  the  life  in  this  holy  man,  cast 
stones  at  him  and  stoned  him  ; and  he  always 
persevered  in  preaching  to  them,  and  counselled 
them  to  be  baptized,  and  they  should  have  forgive- 
ness of  all  their  sins,  and  the  gates  of  heaven 
should  be  opened  to  them,  but  they  ceased  not  of 
their  cruel  casting  of  stones.  Then  at  last  this 
holy  man  Amphiabel  lifted  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven, 
beseeching  our  Lord  to  receive  his  spirit.  And 
then  he  saw  S.  Alban  standing  among  the  angels, 
to  whom  he  said:  O holy  S.  Alban,  I beseech 
thee  that  thou  pray  to  our  Lord  for  me  that  it 
please  him  to  send  his  angel  to  lead  me  surely, 
that  I be  not  let  in  my  way  by  the  cursed  enemy 
the  fiend.  And  unnethe  he  had  said  the  word, 
but  two  angels  descended  from  heaven,  and  said  to 
him : This  day  shalt  thou  be  in  heaven  with 
Alban;  and  when  the  paynims  heard  this  heavenly 
voice  they  were  sore  afeard  and  abashed.  And 
the  angels  took  his  soul  with  heavenly  song  and 
mirth  and  bare  it  unto  heaven,  and  so  departed 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


253 


this  holy  soul  from  the  body.  And  the  paynims,  The 
persevering  in  their  malice,  threw  alway  stones  at  Nativity 
the  dead  body : and  anon  after,  fell  a debate  among  2? 
the  paynims,  that  each  fought  with  other,  and  in  ° P 
the  meanwhile  a Christian  man  stole  away  the  body 
and  hid  it. 

And  anon  after,  our  Lord  showed  a great 
miracle,  and  that  was  that,  the  visages  of  the 
tormentors  were  disfigured,  their  hands,  arms  and 
other  members  dried  up,  and  the  judge  lost  his 
mind  and  was  mad,  because  they  strove  against  the 
will  of  God,  and  suffered  great  pain  afterward. 

Ajid  thus  suffered  these  two  holy  martyrs,  S. 

Alban  and  S.  Amphiabel,  martyrdom  and  death 
for  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ,  which  by  their  merits 
bring  us  unto  his  everlasting  life.  Amen. 


Here  followeth  the  Nativity  of  S.  John  Baptist . 

S.  John  Baptist  is  named  in  many  manners.  He 
was  named  a prophet ; friend  of  the  spouse ; 
lanteme ; an  angel  voice  ; Elias ; baptist  of  the 
Saviour  ; messenger  of  the  judge  5 and  foregoer  of 
the  King.  By  prophet  is  signified  prerogative  of 
knowledge ; in  the  friend  of  the  spouse,  noblesse 
of  love;  in  the  lantern  burning,  noblesse  of  holi- 
ness ; in  an  angel,  prerogative  of  virginity ; in 
voice,  nobleness  of  meekness ; in  Elias,  noblesse 
of  burning  love;  in  baptist,  prerogative  of  mar- 
vellous honour ; in  messenger,  prerogative  of 
preaching;  and  in  foregoing,  prerogative  of  pre- 
paration or  making  ready.  All  these  virtuous 
things  were  in  him 


Digitized  by  VjOOQlC 


The 
Nativity 
of  S.  John 
Baptist 


254  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Of  S.  John  Baptist 

The  nativity  of  S.  John  Baptist  was  ancient,  and 
showed  by  the  Archangel  Gabriel  in  this  manner. 
It  is  said  in  the  History  Scholastic  that  David  the 
king,  willing  to  increase  and  make  more  the  service 
of  God,  instituted  twenty-four  bishops  or  high 
priests,  of  whom  one  was  overest  and  greatest,  and 
was  named  prince  of  the  priests,  and  he  ordained 
that  each  priest  should  serve  a week.  Abias  was 
one,  and  had  the  eighth  week,  of  whose  kindred 
Zacharias  was  descended,  father  of  S.  John 
Baptist.  This  Zacharias  had  to  wife  one  of  the 
daughters  of  the  kindred  of  Aaron,  whose  name 
was  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Esmeria,  which  was 
sister  of  S.  Anne,  mother  of  our  Lady.  Then 
this  Elizabeth  and  our  Lady  were  cousins-german, 
daughters  of  two  sisters.  These  two,  Zacharias 
and  his  wife  Elizabeth,  were  just  tofore  our  Lord, 
living  in  all  the  justifications,  and  holding  all  the 
commandments  of  the  law  without  murmur  ne 
complaint,  praising  and  thanking  our  Lord  God. 
They  had  no  children,  for  the  holy  woman  was 
barren.  They  had  great  desire  to  have  a son  that 
might  be  bishop  of  the  law  by  succession  of  lineage 
after  Zacharias,  and  hereof  had  they  in  their  youth 
prayed  much  to  our  Lord,  but  when  it  pleased  not 
unto  our  Lord,  they  took  it  a worth  and  thanked 
God  of  all.  They  served  the  more  devoutly  our 
Lord  God,  for  they  had  no  charge  but  only  to 
serve  and  entend  unto  him.  Many  there  be  that 
withdraw  them  from  the  service  and  love  of  our 
Lord  for  the  love  of  their  children.  They  were 
both  old,  he  and  his  wife  Elizabeth.  It  happed, 
at  a solemnity  that  the  Jews  had  after  August, 
that  the  bishop  did  holy  sacrifice  in  doing  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


255 


office  that  appertained  to  him  and  to  his  week ; The 
he  went  for  to  incense,  and  entered  into  the  temple,  Nativity 
and  the  people  abode  without,  making  their  prayers  Raotist  ° 
and  awaiting  the  coming  again  to  them  of  the  holy  P 
bishop.  Thus,  as  he  was  alone,  and  incensed  the 
altar,  the  angel  Gabriel  appeared  to  him  standing 
on  the  right  side  of  the  altar,  and  when  the  holy 
bishop  saw  him  he  was  abashed  and  had  great  dread. 

The  angel  said  to  him : Be  nothing  afeard,  Zacharias, 
thy  prayers  be  heard  and  thou  hast  found  grace  to- 
fore  our  Lord.  Elizabeth  thy  wife  shall  conceive 
and  bear  a son,  whom  thou  shalt  call  John,  of  whom 
thou  shalt  have  great  gladness,  and  much  people 
shall  make  great  feast  and  joy  of  his  nativity,  for  he 
shall  be  great,  and  of  great  merit  tofore  our  Lord. 

He  shall  not  drink  wine  ne  cider,  ne  thing  whereof 
he  might  be  drunken,  and  in  his  mother’s  womb  he 
shall  be  sanctified  and  fulfilled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  He  shall  convert  many  of  the  sons  of 
Israel,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  Jews,  to  our  Lord,  and 
shall  go  tofore  him  in  the  spirit  and  virtue  of  Elias 
the  prophet  for  to  convert  father  and  sons,  old  and 
miscreants,  to  the  sense  of  righteousness  and  to  the 
service  of  God.  When  the  angel  had  thus  said  to 
Zacharias,  he  Answered : How  may  I believe  and 
know  that  this  is  truth  that  thou  sayest  ? I am 
now  all  old  and  ancient,  and  my  wife  old  and  barren. 

The.  angel  answered  and  said  : I am  Gabriel,  the 
angel  and  servant  tofore  God,  which  in  his  name  am 
sent  to  speak  to  thee  and  to  show  to  thee  these 
things  aforesaid,  and  because  thou  hast  not  believed 
me  thou  shalt  lose  thy  speech,  and  shalt  not  speak 
till  the  day  that  this  which  I have  said  shall  be 
accomplished,  each  thing  in  his  time.  The  people 
were  abiding  and  awaiting  when  Zacharias  the 
bishop  should  come  out,  an 4r  marvelled  where 
vol.  in.  a 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


256 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  he  tarried  so  long.  He  came  out  of  the  temple, 
Nativity  but  he  might  not  speak,  but  the  holy  man  made  to 
B ^ t^iem  “8118  by  which  they  thought  well  that  he  had 
” 1 seen  some  vision  of  our  Lord,  but  more  knew  they 

not.  He  abode  in  the  temple  all  that  week,  and 
after,  went  home  to  his  house.  His  wife  conceived 
and  waxed  great,  and  when  she  perceived  it  she 
was  shamefaced  and  kept  her  in  her  house  well  five 
months.  In  the  sixth  month  the  same  angel 
Gabriel  was  sent  from  our  Lord  unto  the  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  newly  espoused  to  Joseph,  which 
shewed  the  conception  of  Jesu  Christ,  son  of  God 
our  Lord,  and  the  angel  told  to  her  that  she  should 
conceive  of  the  Holy  Ghost  without  knowledge  of 
man.  For  our  Lord  may  do  all  that  it  pleaseth 
him,  like  as  it  appeared),  said  he,  of  Elizabeth  thy 
cousin,  the  which,  she  being  old  of  age,  and  barren 
by  nature  of  her  body,  hath  conceived  by  the 
pleasure  of  our  Lord,  and  hath  now  borne  about 
six  months.  When  our  Lady  heard  that  S. 
Elizabeth  her  cousin  was  great,  she  went  to  visit 
and  accompany  her  in  the  mountains  where  she 
dwelt,  right  far,  hard,  and  evil  way.  When  she 
came  thither  she  saluted  her  much  courteously. 
Our  Lady  was  then  great  with  the  blessed  Son  of 
God,  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  whom  she  had  con- 
ceived when  she  said  to  the  angel : Ecce  ancilla 
domini ; and  then  she  was  replenished  with  the  deity 
and  humanity  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ.  Then, 
when  the  salutation  issued  out  of  the  body  of  our 
Lady,  the  greeting  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  body 
of  S.  Elizabeth,  and  into  her  child  that  she  had  with- 
in her,  which  child  was  anoint  of  the  blessed  Holy 
Ghost,  and,  by  the  presence  of  our  Lord,  sanctified 
in  the  womb  of  his  mother  and  replenished  with 
grace,  whereof  he  removed  liim  for  joy  in  his 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


257 


mother’s  womb,  in  making  to  our  Lord  reverence  The 
such  as  he  might  make  not  of  himself,  but  by  the  Nativity 
grace  that  he  had  received  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  2?  ^tiat ^ 
Of  which  by  the  merits  and  grace  done  to  the  U ” 
blessed  child,  S.  Elizabeth  was  replenished,  and 
anon  prophesied  in  saying  and  crying  with  a high 
voice : Thou  art  blessed  among  and  above  all 
women,  and  blessed  be  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 

From  whence  cometh  to  me  such  grace,  so  great 
that  the  mother  of  my  Lord  cometh  to  visit  me  ? 

I know  well  that  thou  hast  conceived  the  Son  of 
God,  for  as  soon  as  thy  salutation  entered  into 
mine  ears,  the  child  that  is  in  my  belly  made  joy 
and  feast,  and  removed.  Thou  art  well  blessed  and 
happy  that  thou  hast  given  faith  and  believed  the 
words  of  the  angel  which  he  said  to  thee,  for  all 
things  shall  be  performed  that  he  hath  said  to  thee. 

Of  all  these  things  S.  Elizabeth  knew  nothing 
when  our  Lady  came,  ne  yet  our  Lady  had  nothing 
said  to  her,  but  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  merits  of  her 
holy  child  that  she  bare,  replenished  her  and  made 
her  to  prophesy.  Then  answered  our  Lady  and 
made  the  holy  psalm  saying:  Magnificat  anima 
mea  dominum,  and  all  the  remnant.  Our  Lady 
abode  with  S.  Elizabeth  three  months  or  there- 
abouts till  she  was  delivered  and  laid  abed,  and  it 
is  said  that  she  did  the  office  and  service  to  receive 
S.  John  Baptist  when  he  was  born. 

When  then  he  was  born,  and  the  neighbours  and 
cousins  and  friends  knew  the  grace  that  our  Lord 
had  done  to  these  holy  folk,  noble  of  lineage,  rich 
of  goods  and  of  great  dignity,  to  whom  in  the  end  of 
their  age  he  had  given  an  heir  male  against  double 
or  treble  nature,  they  made  great  joy  and  feast  with 
them.  When  the  eighth  day  came,  and  the  child 
should  be  circumcised,  they  called  him  after  his 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


258 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  father’ 8 name,  Zacharias.  The  mother  said  that 
Nativity  should  be  named  John,  and  not  Zacharias,  and 
°*  Baotist  *cy  went  unto  the  father  and  said  that  there  was 
""^none  in  that  kindred  that  so  was  called.  And 
then  the  father  demanded  pen  and  ink,  and  wrote : 
Johannes  est  nomen  ejus,  John  is  his  name,  and  all 
they  marvelled.  Anon  after,  by  the  merit  of  S. 
John,  his  father’s  mouth  was  opened,  and  had 
again  his  speech,  and  spake,  glorifying  our  Lord 
God.  And  these  tidings  of  this  holy  child  thus 
born,  were  anon  spread  all  about  the  country,  and 
each  man  said  in  his  heart,  and  without  forth  one  to 
another : What  suppose  ye  shall  be  of  this  child  ? 
He  shall  be  great  and  a man  of  our  Lord,  for  he  is 
already  now  with  him,  and  the  hand,  die  work, 
and  the  virtue  of  our  Lord  is  with  him.  The 
father,  holy  Zacharias,  replenished  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  said  and  prophesied,  and  made  then  the 
holy  psalm:  Benedictus  Dominus  Deus  Israel, 
which  psalm  is  always  sung  in  the  end  of  matins. 

It  is  said  that  holy  Zacharias  dwelled  upon  the 
mountains  two  miles  nigh  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 
S.  John  Baptist  was  born,  and  after  that  S.  John 
was  circumcised,  he  was  nourished  as  a child  of  a 
noble  and  rich  man  and  son  of  great  dignity,  but 
when  he  had  understanding  and  strength  of  body, 
God  our  Lord  and  the  heart  performed  the  work. 
He  issued  out  of  his  father’s  house,  and  left  riches, 
honours,  dignities,  noblesse,  and  all  the  world,  and 
went  into  desert  on  Horn  Jordan.  Some  say  he 
went  in  the  age  of  fifteen  years  accomplished,  and 
others  say  he  departed  at  twelve  years  of  age  for 
to  serve  our  Lord  without  empeshment,  by  which 
he  kept  silence,  and  bydwonge  his  life  and  his  soul 
from  idle  words.  This  holy  S.  John,  dwelling  in 
desert,  ware  an  hair  made  of  the  hair  of  camels. 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


259 


Some  say  that  he  ware  the  skin  of  a camel,  in  The 
which  he  had  made  an  hole  to  put  his  head  in, 
and  girded  it  with  a girdle  of  wool,  or  of  leather,  2f 
cut  out  of  an  hide  or  a beast’s  skin.  He  ate  p 
locusts,  not  such  a we  have  here  that  we  call 
honeysuckles;  some  say  that  it  is  flesh  of  some 
beasts  that  abound  in  the  desert  of  Judea  where  he 
baptized ; with  wild  honey  he  ate  it.  That  it  was 
flesh,  the  legend  of  S.  Austin  doth  us  to  understand, 
which  saith  that  S.  Austin  ate  flesh  by  the  example 
of  Elias  the  prophet,  which  ate  the  flesh  that  a crow 
brought  to  him,  and  so  S.  John  ate  locusts ; some 
say  that  there  be  roots  so  called.  There  served  he 
our  Lord  solitarily  upon  the  flom  Jordan  till  that 
he  was  about  twenty-nine  years  old.  The  angel  of 
our  Lord  came  to  him  and  said  that  he  should 
show  the  coming  of  our  Lord  and  preach  penance, 
for  to  purge  them  that  were  baptized,  in  accus- 
toming the  baptism  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ. 

This  angel  said  to  S.  John  Baptist  that,  Jesu  Christ, 
Saviour  of  the  world,  should  come  to  him  for  to  be 
baptized,  and  it  should  be  he  on  whom  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  descend  in  semblance  of  a dove. 

S.  John  drew  him  towards  Bethany,  upon  the 
river  or  desert,  not  far  from  Jerusalem;  there 
preached  he,  and  taught  and  baptized  them  that 
would  amend  their  life,  and  said  to  them  that  the 
Saviour  and  health  of  the  world  was  nigh.  Then 
came  to  him  many,  and  he  said  to  some  religious 
men  of  evil  life : Ye  children  of  serpents,  who  hath 
given  to  you  counsel  to  eschew  the  ire  of  our 
Lord?  If  ye  will  be  baptized  in  sign  of  penance, 
do  ye  the  works  of  penitence.  Leave  the  evil, 
humble  you,  do  the  work  of  mercy ; ween  ye, 
because  ye  be  circumcised  and  be  the  children  of 
Abraham,  that  ye  shall  be  saved?  Our  Lord 


,y  Google 


260 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  shall  make  of  these  stones  if  it  please  him  the 
child  of  Abraham  which  with  Abraham  shall 
° Baotist^  8ave<^#  S.  John  preached  about  a year 
p tofore  that  our  Lord  came  to  him  for  to  be 
baptized.  When  the  Pharisees  heard  say  that 
he  baptized,  they  sent  to  know  what  he  was, 
and  they  demanded  if  he  were  Christ  the  great 
prophet  that  was  promised  in  their  law,  and  he 
said:  Nay.  They  demanded  him  if  he  were 
Elias,  and  come  from  Paradise  terrestrial,  he 
said:  Nay.  They  demanded  him  if  he  was  a 
prophet,  he  said:  Nay.  They  demanded  him 
whereof  he  meddled  then  to  baptize,  since  he  was 
neither  Christ,  ne  Elias,  ne  prophet.  Say  to  us, 
said  they,  who  that  thou  art,  that  we  may  answer 
to  them  that  have  sent  us  hither.  He  answered : 
I am  he  of  whom  Isaiah  prophesied : I am  the 
voice  of  the  crier  in  desert : Address  ye  and  make 
ready  the  ways  to  God,  and  make  ye  right  the 
paths  of  our  Lord.  They  said  to  him : Where- 
fore baptizest  thou  then  ? I baptize  and  wash  the 
body  with  water  in  sign  of  penance,  but  among  you 
is  he  that  ye  know  not,  which  was  tofore  me,  and 
came  after  me,  of  whom  I am  not  worthy  to  loose 
the  latchet  of  his  shoe.  He  shall  give  you  baptism 
in  the  virtue  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  water  and  fire 
of  penance. 

When  S.  John  along  the  Horn  Jordan  had 
preached  and  baptized  about  a year,  our  Lord 
came  unto  him  and  would  be  baptized  of  him. 
S.  John,  enlumined  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  knew 
him,  and  did  to  him  reverence  as  to  his  God,  his 
Maker,  and  Lord.  He  was  so  espired  that  human 
nature  which  was  pure  in  him  might  not  sustain 
so  great  knowledge,  and  he  said  right  humbly: 
Sir,  thou  comest  to  me,  which  art  pure  and  clean, 


Digitized  by  Goode 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


261 


to  be  baptized  and  washed  of  me  that  am  foul  and  The 
wasted,  which  ought  to  be  baptized  of  thee  and  Jjife  °* 
washed,  how  dare  I lay  on  thee  my  hands  ? Our  °^c 
Lord  said  to  him : Do  this  that  I say  now,  for 
thus  behoveth  it  to  fulfil  all  justice  and  to  humble 
and  give  ensample  of  baptism  to  all  people.  And 
then  in  humility  and  patience  he  baptized  our  Lord, 
and  washed  him  where  he  had  never  filth,  and 
all  by  holy  mystery;  on  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
descended  visibly  in  likeness  of  a dove,  and  the 
voice  of  the  Father  was  heard  saying : Here  is 
my  well-beloved  son  in  whom  I am  well  pleased. 

Then  our  Lord  was  thirty  years  old  from  his 
nativity  and  thirteen  days  beginning  of  the  thirty- 
first  year.  On  that  same  day  our  Lord  changed 
water  into  wine  in  Cana  of  Galilee.  And  this 
8ufficeth  for  the  nativity  of  S.  John  Baptist,  and 
the  residue  of  his  life  and  of  his  death  shall  be 
said  at  the  feast  of  his  decollation,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  who  bringeth  us  to  his  bliss.  Amen. 


The  Life  of  S . Loye . 

S.  Loye  was  born  in  the  country  of  Limoges. 
His  father  was  named  Eucherius  and  his  mother 
Terrigia.  What  time  his  mother  was  conceived 
with  him,  she  saw  in  her  sleep,  an  eagle  fly  over 
her  bed,  and  thrice  bowed  and  inclined  to  her,  and 
promised  to  her  something.  And  with  the  voice 
of  the  eagle  she  awoke  and  was  much  abashed, 
and  began  to  think  what  her  dream  might  signify. 
And  when  the  time  came  of  childing,  and  that 
she  should  be  delivered,  she  was  in  great  peril, 
and  anon  she  sent  for  an  holy  man  to  come  and 
pray  for  her#  When  the  good  man  was  come, 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


262 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  anon  he  said  to  her : Have  no  doubt  dame  ne 
Life  of  dread,  for  this  child  shall  be  holy  and  much  great 
5.  Loye  *n  church.  And  after  that  he  was  bora,  this 
child  grew  in  virtue,  and  his  father  set  him  to 
goldsmith’s  craft;  and  when  he  knew  well  the 
craft  and  art  of  goldsmithery  he  came  into  France 
and  dwelt  with  a goldsmith  that  made  work  for 
the  king.  It  happed  that  time  that  the  king  sought 
for  one  that  could  make  for  him  a saddle  of  gold 
and  of  precious  stones.  Then  the  master  of  S. 
Loye  said  to  the  king  that  he  had  found  a work- 
man that  should  right  well  make  whatsomever  he 
would.  The  king  delivered  to  him  a great  mass 
of  gold,  which  mass  the  master  delivered  to  S. 
Loye,  whereof  he  made  two  right  fair  saddles  and 
presented  that  one  to  the  king  and  that  other  he 
retained  himself.  When  the  king  saw  this  saddle 
so  fair  he  and  all  his  people  marvelled  much  thereof 
and  the  king  rewarded  him  much  largely.  Then 
after  this,  S.  Loye  presented  to  the  king  that 
other  saddle,  saying  to  him  that,  of  the  remnant 
of  the  gold  he  had  made  the  same,  and  then  was 
the  king  more  amarvelled  than  he  was  tofore  and 
demanded  how  he  might  make  these  two  saddles 
of  that  weight  that  was  delivered  to  him ; S.  Loye 
said : Well  by  the  pleasure  of  God.  Then  grew 
the  name  and  fame  of  him  in  the  king’s  court. 
S.  Loye  loved  well  poor  people,  for  all  that  he  won 
and  might  win  he  distributed  it  to  them,  in  so  much 
that  oft  he  was  almost  naked.  The  poor  people 
also  loved  him,  that  where  he  went  they  followed 
him,  and  that  they  that  would  speak  with  him  must 
ask  and  enquire  of  the  poor  people  where  he  was. 

On  a time  it  happed  that  as  he  dealed  alms 
with  his  own  hand,  there  was  a poor  man  that 
had  his  hand  stiff  and  lame,  and  put  forth  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  263 

better  hand  to  receive  the  alms.  Then  S.  Loye 
said  to  him  that  he  should  put  forth  that  other 
hand,  which  as  well  as  he  might  he  put  forth. 
S.  Loye  took  and  handled  it  and  anointed  it  with 
a little  oil,  and  anon  it  was  guerished  and  whole. 

Another  time  when  he  had  given  to  the  poor 
people  all  the  gold  and  silver  that  he  had,  many 
other  poor  men  came  and  demanded  of  him  alms : 
and  beholding  himself  that  he  had  no  more  to 
give,  anon  he  departed  among  them  a mark  of 
gold  that  he  had  borrowed  of  his  neighbour,  and 
anon  after,  came  more  poor  folk  to  demand  alms, 
he  put  his  hand  anon  to  his  purse,  for  he  re- 
membered not  that  it  was  void,  and  by  the  will 
of  God  he  found  therein  a mark  of  gold,  and 
when  he  had  found  that  he  began  greatly  to  thank 
our  Lord  God  thereof,  and  distributed  it  and 
departed  it  to  the  poor  people  for  the  love  of  God. 

He  was  of  high  stature,  red  of  visage  and 
angelic,  of  simple  and  prudent  regard  and  cheer. 
At  the  beginning  he  was  clad  with  precious  vest- 
ments of  gold  adorned  with  gems  and  ouches,  and 
ware  gilt  girdles  with  precious  stones,  but  under 
that,  on  his  bare  flesh,  he  wore  always  the  hair. 
After  this  he  gave  all  his  precious  vesture  to  the 
poor  people  for  to  succour  them  in  their  necessities, 
and  from  then  forthon  he  used  always  simple  and 
poor  clothing,  and  oft  despoiled  himself  for  to 
clothe  the  poor  people.  And  when  the  king  saw 
him  in  such  wise  he  gave  to  him  his  own  vest- 
ments and  girdles,  for  he  loved  him  as  his  proper 
soul,  and  abandoned  to  him  all  his  house,  and 
commanded  to  all  his  folk  that  all  that  S.  Loye 
would  have  should  be  delivered  to  him  without 
delay,  and  all  he  gave  and  distributed  to  poor  folk, 
prisoners  and  to  sick. 


The 
Life  of 
S*  Loye 


264 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The 
Life  of 
S.  Loye 


From  the  time  of  Brunehilde  queen,  unto  the 
time  of  Dagobert,  the  pestilence  of  simony  reigned 
strongly,  which,  for  to  take  away  and  destroy, 
S.  Loye  and  S.  Ouen  laboured  sore.  Then  was 
S.  Loye  chosen  bishop  of  Noyon,  after  Achaire 
bishop  of  the  said  city,  and  with  him  was  chosen 
S.  Ouen  archbishop  of  Rouen.  S.  Loye  was 
pastor  spiritual  of  Tournay,  city  royal,  of  Noyon, 
of  Ghent,  and  of  all  Flanders,  and  of  Courtrai. 
He  had  a certain  place  in  which,  by  certain  days, 
he  called  to  him  poor  and  sick  men  and  served  them 
devoutly,  and  made  clean  their  heads  and  washed 
them,  and  them  that  were  lousy  and  full  of  vermin 
he  himself  would  pick  and  make  them  clean,  and 
gave  them  meat  and  drink,  and  clothed  them; 
and  when  they  departed  anon  came  other  to  whom 
he  did  in  like  wise.  And  when  great  company 
came,  sometime  he* made  them  to  sit  down  and 
refreshed  them  all,  but  every  day,  at  the  least  he 
had  twelve,  the  which  he  made  sit  down,  and  at 
certain  hour  ate  and  drank  with  them,  but  first  he 
washed  their  hands  and  served  them.  On  a time 
he  impetred  and  gat  of  the  king  that  all  the  bodies 
that  were  condemned  to  death,  that  he  could  find 
in  towns  and  cities  hanged  and  ratted,  that  he 
might  take  them  down  and  bury  them,  and  ordained 
men  of  his  college  to  do  it. 

It  happed  on  a time  that  in  the  company  of  the 
king  in  the  parties  of  Arastria,  in  a town  named 
Strabor,  he  found  a man  that  was  hanged  that  same 
day  and  was  then  dead,  and  men  made  the  sepulture 
for  to  bury  him  in.  And  S.  Loye  approached 
him  and  began  to  take  him  down,  and  apperceived 
that  the  soul  was  in  the  body.  He  would  not 
appropriate  the  miracle  to  him  but  kept  him  from 
vain  glory  and  said  full  sweetly:  O,  what  evil 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


265 


have  we  done  for  to  let  this  man  to  be  taken  off  The 
if  God  Almighty  had  not  holpen  us ; the  soul  °* 
is  yet  in  his  body.  When  he  was  raised,  he  was  ^ 
clad,  and  he  did  him  to  take  his  rest.  When 
they  that  had  made  him  to  die  knew  it,  they  would 
have  made  him  receive  death  again,  and  with  great 
pain  S.  Loye  delivered  him  from  their  hands,  yet 
he  gat  letters  of  grace  for  him,  to  be  more  sure. 

There  was  a priest  in  his. diocese  which  was  in- 
famed,  and  oft  he  reproved  him  and  exhorted  him 
to  be  confessed,  but  the  priest  alway  heled  his  sin. 

When  S.  Loye  saw  that  his  fair  admonition 
availed  not,  he  excommunicated  and  accursed  him, 
and  defended  him  that  he  should  no  more  sing 
mass  unto  the  time  he  had  done  open  penance. 

The  priest  set  nought  by  his  commandment  ne 
defence,  in  despiting  his  sentence.  A little  after 
this  the  said  priest  would  go  sing  mass,  and  as  he 
approached  unto  the  ahar,  he  fell  down  to  ground 
and  died. 

Many  other  miracles  did  he  by  his  life  and 
doeth  yet.  He  edified  at  Noyon  the  ancelles 
of  Jesu  Christ.  By  him,  God  showed  the  body 
of  S.  Quintin.  He  found  at  Soissons  the  bodies 
of  two  brethren  germanes,  martyrs,  S.  Crispin  and 
Crispinian,  and  ordained  a precious  vessel  to  put 
them  in.  He  found  also  at  Beauvais  the  body  of 
S.  Lucian,  which  was  of  the  company  of  S. 
Quintin,  which  he  put  in  a precious  vessel.  At 
Paris,  upon  the  great  bridge,  he  made  a blind  man 
to  see.  The  sexton  of  the  church  of  S.  Colomba 
at  Paris,  came  to  S.  Loye  and  said  to  him  that 
thieves  had  borne  away  by  night  all  the  jewels 
and  parements  of  the  said  church.  Then  S.  Loye 
went  into  the  oratory  of  S.  Colomba,  and  said  to 
him : Hark  thou,  Colomba,  what  I say  to  thee ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


266 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
William 


my  Redeemer  will  that  anon  thou  bring  again  the 
ornaments  of  this  church  that  have  been  taken 
away,  or  I shall  in  such  wise  close  the  doors  with 
thorns,  that  never  hereafter  thou  shalt,  in  this 
place,  be  served  ne  worshipped.  When  he  had 
said  thus  he  departed.  On  the  morn  the  sexton 
of  the  said  church,  that  was  called  Maturin,  rose 
up.  and  found  all  the  parements  and  jewels  that 
had  been  borne  away,  and  were  set  in  the  place 
as  they  had  been  tofore. 

S.  Loye  did  do  ordain  much  richly  the  body 
of  S.  Germain  and  the  bodies  of  S.  Severin,  S. 
Plato,  S.  Quintin,  S.  Lucian,  S.  Genevieve,  S. 
Colomba,  S.  Maxime,  S.  Julian,  and  specially  of 
S.  Martin  at  Tours,  by  Dagobert  the  king,  and 
the  tomb  of  S.  Brice,  and  another  tomb  where  the 
body  of  S.  Martin  had  been  long  in,  and  the  house 
of  S.  Denis  the  martyr  at  Paris,  and  the  tigurion 
of  marble  which  is  upon  him,  of  marvellous  work 
of  gold  and  of  gems.  When  S.  Loye  died  he 
was  seventy  years  old.  At  the  end  of  the  year 
he  was  transported  into  another  place,  and  was 
found  also  fresh  and  without  rotting  as  he  had  been 
alive  in  his  sepulchre.  Now  hear  ye  yet  a more 
great  miracle : his  beard  and  his  hairs  were  shaven 
when  he  died,  but  in  his  tomb,  when  he  was 
translated,  they  were  found  as  great  and  long  as 
they  had  always  grown  in  his  tomb. 


Thus  endeth  the  Life  of  S.  Loye  and  beginneth  the 
Life  of  S.  William. 

S.  William  was  drawn  out  of  noble  lineage. 
In  his  childhood  he  was  made  canon  of  Paris  and 
of  Soi88ons,  and  when  he  came  to  perfect  age  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  267 

was  a man  ripe  and  attempered,  he  might  no  more  The  Life 
suffer  the  pestilences  and  the  perils  of  this  deceivable  S. 
world,  but  brake  all  the  bonds  of  the  world  and  ™“am 
went  into  a desert  named  Granmonte,  and  lived 
there  a great  while  in  pure  conscience  and  in  holy 
contemplation,  but,  as  he  led  this  life,  there  grew 
on  him  a great  tribulation  that  he  had  great  fear 
that  the  tranquillity  of  his  contemplation  might  be 
troubled,  and  went  into  an  abbey  of  Citeaux  and 
there  he  was  professed,  and  profited  much  in 
virtues  from  then  forthon,  and  after,  he  was  there 
made  prior.  Afterward  he  was  translated  from 
thence  into  another  abbey  that  is  called  Karo- 
losence,  and  there  by  election  he  was  chosen  abbot. 

And  there  in  all  humility  he  treated  debonairly 
his  disciples  and  subjects,  in  showing  to  them 
examples  of  good  virtues  and  good  manners. 

After,  he  was  chosen  to  be  archbishop  of  Bourges, 
and  how  well  it  was  against  his  will,  he  accepted 
it ; nevertheless  when  he  had  accepted  and  taken 
it,  yet  therefore  changed  he  not  the  habit  of  the 
order  which  he  had  tofore  taken,  ne  the  observance 
also.  And  how  well  that  he  had  meats  delicious 
enough,  as  to  such  a prelate  be  ordained  and 
arrayed,  nevertheless  he  left  not  the  soberness 
that  he  had  maintained  tofore,  in  humility,  in  holy 
meditation,  and  in  devout  prayers,  in  which  gladly 
always  he  occupied  his  time.  And  he  was  much 
busy  for  the  health  of  the  souls  that  were  com- 
mitted to  him  and  charged  to  keep ; gladly  and 
diligently  he  heard  their  confessions,  he  nourished 
them  sweetly,  oft  and  diligently  he  preached  to 
them  or  did  do  preach.  He  deserved  so  much 
grace  of  our  Lord  that  by  his  devout  prayers 
and  merits  in  his  living  life  God  showed  many 
miracles. 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


268 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
William 


On  a day  it  happed  that  a priest  named  Gerald 
had  lost  the  health  of  one  of  his  hands,  that  he 
might  sing  no  mass,  which  came  to  S.  William, 
and  S.  William  bade  him  that  he  should  confess 
him  and  without  doubt  he  should  be  whole,  and  so 
he  did,  and  at  the  end  of  three  days  he  sang  mass 
whole  and  sound.  Another  time  there  was  a 
young  child  that  had  his  brain  sore  troubled,  in 
such  wise  that  his  eyes  turned  in  his  head;  his 
friends  brought  him  tofore  this  holy  man,  on  whom 
he  had  great  pity  and  began  humbly  to  handle  him 
and  laid  his  hand  on  his  head,  and  anon  the  pain 
ceased  and  he  was  anon  all  whole.  He  was 
always  glad  and  joyous,  and  that  displeased  much 
to  some  that  were  of  hard  and  rude  living.  Above 
all  things  the  sin  of  detraction  displeased  him 
much,  and  he  loved  no  detractors,  and  to  his 
power,  with  great  diligence,  he  made  them  to 
eschew  this  sin,  and  where  they  would  not  he 
withdrew  him  from  their  company.  Finally  he 
took  the  cross  for  to  go  over  sea  against  heretics 
and  heathen  men,  and  as  he  made  his  purveyance 
for  to  make  the  said  voyage,  he  rendered  and  gave 
up  his  soul  to  Almighty  God,  the  fifth  ides  of  the 
month  of  January,  and  was  buried  in  the  church 
of  Bourges,  the  which  anon  after,  began  to  do 
miracles.  When  the  pope  Honorius  die  third 
heard  his  life,  and  how  God  showed  miracles  for 
him,  after  that  he  by  great  diligence  had  made 
inquisition,  he  canonised  him  to  the  honour  and 
praising  of  God,  which  by  the  prayers  of  the  said 
S.  William  bring  us  to  his  everlasting  bliss  in 
heaven.  Amen. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


269 


Here  beginneth  the  Life  of  S.  Eutrope* 

S.  Eutrope  was  bom  and  came  of  the  most 
excellent  lineage  of  all  the  world,  and  was  bora  in 
the  realm  of  Persia,  and  was  son  of  the  admiral 
of  Babylon,  which  was  named  Exerces,  whom 
the  said  Exerces  engendered  on  a queen  which 
was  called  Gwyne.  And  S.  Eutrope  was  en- 
doctrined  in  his  youth  in  letters  of  Chaldee  and  of 
Greek,  sofarforth  that  he  was  compared  to  the 
most  greatest  clerk  of  the  realm.  After,  he  went 
to  Galilee  into  the  court  of  king  Herod,  for 
to  see  some  curiosity  or  some  novelty  of  the 
barbarians  that  were  with  the  king  Herod.  When 
he  had  dwelt  there  certain  days  in  the  court  he 
heard  the  fame  and  renomee  of  the  miracles  of 
our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  began  to  enquire  and 
search  so  much  that  he  heard  say  that  our  Lord 
would  go  over  the  sea  of  Galilee,  and  he  put 
himself  in  the  multitude  of  the  people  that  followed 
him.  It  happed  that  this  day,  our  Lord,  by  his 
infinite  largesse,  refreshed  and  fed  five  thousand 
men  with  five  loaves  of  barley  bread  and  two 
fishes,  in  the  presence  of  S.  Eutrope.  When  S. 
Eutrope  had  seen  this  miracle  ana  heard  say  of 
his  other  miracles,  from  then  forthon  he  began  to 
believe  a little  in  him,  but  he  durst  not  for  his 
pedagogue  or  his  governor  which  was  with  him, 
for  the  admiral,  his  father,  had  committed  him  in 
his  guard.  When  he  had  fed  him  with  the  other, 
he  went  to  Jerusalem  into  the  temple  for  to  pray 
and  adore  his  creator  in  his  law,  and  after  this 
went  home  to  his  father,  and  told  him  all  that  he 
had  seen  in  the  country  from  whence  he  came.  I 
have  seen  a man,  said  he,  that  is  called  Christ, 
but  in  all  the  world  is  not  his  pareil  ne  like,  for  he 


The  Life 
of  a 

Eutrope 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


270 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  raiseth  dead  men,  he  healeth  the  lazars,  he  maketh 
of  S.  blind  men  to  see,  the  deaf  to  hear,  the  lame  to  go 
BlrtroPe  right,  and  healeth  all  manner  sicknesses,  and  yet 
more,  tofore  me  he  hath  fed,  with  five  loaves  of 
barley  and  two  fishes,  five  thousand  men.  Where- 
fore if  it  pleased  him  that  hath  made  heaven  and 
earth  to  send  him  into  this  country,  l shall  be  glad 
and  joyous,  if  it  pleased  you,  to  do  him  honour 
and  reverence.  When  the  admiral  heard  the 
words  of  the  child  he  went  thinking  how  he  might 
see  him.  A little  while  after,  the  child,  that  had 
great  desire  to  see  yet  Jesu  Christ,  took  leave  of 
his  father,  which  he  gat  with  great  pain,  and  came 
sith  with  great  company  for  to  worship  and  adore 
in  the  temple,  where  he  saw  on  a day  how  the 
children  of  Jerusalem  came  with  a great  company 
of  people  tofore  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  unto  Bethany, 
making  to  him  great  reverence,  and  took  the  boughs 
ot  palm,  and  of  olives,  and  of  other  trees,  and 
many  other  flowers,  which  they  threw  in  the  way 
where  he  should  pass,  and  sang  with  high  voice : 
Hosanna!  Then  S.  Eutrope  himself  began  to 
cast  flowers  in  the  way,  but  he  was  much  angry 
because  he  might  not  see  Jesu  Christ  for  the 
multitude  of  the  people  that  was  there,  and,  after 
that  is  contained  in  the  gospel,  he  was  in  the 
company  of  them  that  were  come  for  to  adore  and 
worship  in  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  that  was  there, 
which  said  to  S.  Philip : Sir,  we  would  see  Jesu 
Christ.  Then  S.  Philip,  accompanied  with  S. 
Andrew,  told  it  to  Jesu  Christ.  And  anon  after, 
S.  Eutrope  and  his  company  saw  him  sitting  upon 
an  ass,  whereof  he  was  right  glad,  and  from  then 
forthon  he  believed  secretly  and  accompanied  with 
him,  but  he  doubted  his  fellowship,  forasmuch  as 
his  father  had  commanded  them  to  keep  him  well. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


271 


and  that  they  should  bring  him  again  with  them.  The  Life 
Then  he  heard  say  that  the  Jews  should  shortly  of  S. 
bring  Jesu  Christ  to  death,  and  because  he  would  ^ntropc 
not  see  so  great  cruelty  done  to  so  true  and  just  a 
man,  he  departed  on  the  mom  and  went  in  to  his 
country,  and  recounted  all  that  he  had  seen  of 
our  Lord.  A little  while  after  he  returned,  and 
heard  say  how  he  was  put  to  death,  wherefore  he 
was  sorry,  for  he  loved  him  much.  But  when  he 
heard  say  that  he  was  risen  from  death  to  life, 
and  ascended  in  to  heaven,  he  was  much  joyous, 
and  returned  into  Babylon,  fulfilled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  all  the  Jews  that  he  found  in  his 
country,  for  anger  he  destroyed,  because  they  of 
Jerusalem  had  put  our  Lord  to  death. 

After  this,  a certain  time,  when  the  apostles 
were  departed  through  the  world,  two  shining 
candlesticks  of  gold  were  sent  into  Persia  which 
were  of  very  faith,  that  is  to  say  Simon  and 
Thaddeus  the  apostles  of  God,  and  entered  into 
Babylon  and  had  chased  out  of  the  country  two 
enchanters,  Zaroen  and  Arphaxat,  which  had  per- 
verted the  people  by  false  and  deceivable  speaking. 

And  in  this  city  these  two  apostles  began  to  sow 
the  word  of  God,  and  to  do  many  miracles,  and 
heal  sick  people  of  divers  maladies.  When  this 
holy  young  man  knew  of  their  coming  he  was 
right  glad,  and  admonished  his  father  to  leave  his 
errors  and  his  idols,  and  that  he  should  receive 
the  Christian  faith  to  the  end  that  he  might  get 
thereby  heaven.  And  what  by  the  predication  of 
the  apostles,  and  by  the  counsel  and  exhorting 
of  his  son,  his  father  and  many  others  were  con- 
verted and  regenerate  in  the  holy  font  of  baptism 
by  the  hands  of  the  apostles,  and  after,  all  the  city 
was  converted  to  the  faith,  and  did  do  make  a 


VOL.  III. 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


272  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

The  Life  much  notable  church  there,  and  ordained  there  a 
of  S.  prelate,  an  holy  man  and  true,  whom  they  had 
Eutrope  brought  with  them  from  Jerusalem,  named  Abdias, 
endoctrined  in  the  doctrine  of  the  gospels,  and 
they  ordained  S.  Eutrope  archdeacon.  And 
when  they  had  all  thus  ordained,  they  departed 
and  went  in  to  other  cities  for  to  preach  the  faith 
of  God,  and  anon  after,  they  received  the  palm  of 
martyrdom.  After,  S.  Eutrope  wrote  their  passion 
in  letters  of  Chaldee  and  of  Greek.  A little  while 
after,  S.  Eutrope  heard  speak  of  the  miracles  that 
S.  Peter  prince  of  the  apostles  did,  which  that 
time  was  pope  of  Rome ; he  took  leave  of  the 
bishops  privily,  without  witting  of  his  father,  and 
came  to  Rome.  When  S.  Peter  saw  him,  he 
received  him  much  agreeably,  and  endoctrined  and 
taught  him  the  law  of  God  much  diligently. 
When  he  had  dwelled  with  S.  Peter  a long  while, 
by  the  ordinance  and  commandment  of  S.  Peter, 
he  went  in  to  France  with  many  others  for  to 
preach  the  Christian  faith,  and  thus  as  he  entered 
into  the  city  of  Xaintes ; he  went  through  the 
streets  and  places  preaching  the  faith  of  Christ. 
Anon,  as  they  of  the  city  saw  him,  they  knew  well 
that  he  was  a barbarian  by  his  speech,  and  when 
they  heard  him  preach  things  that  they  never 
heard  tofore,  they  burned  him  with  burning  fagots, 
and  beat  him  with  poles  villainously,  and  when  ' 
they  had  so  villainously  beaten  him,  they  put  him 
out  of  the  city.  But  the  glorious  friend  of  God 
bare  full  patiently  this  persecution,  and  made  in  a 
mountain,  right  nigh  the  city,  a little  lodge  of 
boughs,  wherein  he  dwelled  a great  while,  and  by 
daytime  he  came  and  preached  in  the  city,  and  at 
night  he  returned  unto  his  little  lodge,  where  he 
abode  in  fastings  and  prayers  and  in  orisons. 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


273 


Then  when  he  had  been  long  there  and  had  The  Life 
converted  but  few  of  the  people,  he  went  again  to  ^ 

S.  Peter  to  Rome,  and  when  he  came  thither  he  °*>C 
found  that  he  had  suffered  passion  on  the  cross, 
and  found  there  S.  Clement  in  his  stead,  which 
commanded  and  counselled  him  to  return  into  the 
said  city  of  Xaintes,  and  that  in  preaching  the 
commandments  ot  God  benignly  he  should  abide 
the  palm  of  victory  for  the  love  of  our  Lord,  that 
is  to  wit  passion  and  martyrdom.  Then  S. 

Clement  ordained  him  a bishop,  and  also  S.  Denis 
which  was  come  out  of  Greece  to  Rome,  and 
many  other  brethren  which  S.  Clement  sent  into 
France,  and  thus  departed  they  from  Rome  and 
arrived  in  the  city  of  Auxerre,  and  there,  in  great 
love,  they  kissed  and  embraced  each  other  in 
taking  leave  for  to  depart  one  from  another  and 
tenderly  wept.  S.  Denis  and  his  fellows  came  to 
Paris  and  S.  Eutrope  went  to  Xaintes,  strongly 
confirmed  and  firm  in  the  love  of  God,  all  prest 
and  ready  to  suffer  all  torments,  and  much  con- 
stantly preached  the  faith  in  such  wise  that  many 
were  baptized.  Among  whom  the  daughter  of 
the  king  of  the  said  city,  which  was  named  Euscelle, 
was  baptized.  When  her  father  knew  it,  he 
had  thereof  so  great  indignation  that  he  put  her 
out  of  the  city,  and  anon  as  she  was  out,  for  the 
love  of  God  she  went  straight  unto  the  lodge  of 
the  holy  man  and  abode  there.  Always  the 
father  for  love  that  he  had  to  his  daughter  was 
sorry  that  he  had  put  her  out,  and  sent  ofttimes  to 
her  messengers  for  to  come  again  home  to  him. 

To  whom  she  answered  that  she  had  liefer  for  the 
faith  of  Jesu  Christ  dwell  out  of  the  city,  than  to 
return  in  again  to  sacrifice  to  the  idols.  For 
which  answer  the  father  was  so  angry  and  wroth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X 


274 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  that  he  wist  not  what  to  do,  and  did  do  assemble 
of  S.  all  the  butchers  of  the  town,  and  gave  to  them  an 
Eutrope  anci  fifty  shillings  for  to  put  to  death  S. 

Eutrope,  and  that  they  should  bring  again  his 
daughter  to  his  house.  Then,  the  day  tofore  the 
calends  of  May,  they  assembled  with  them  many 
Saracens  and  came  to  the  lodge  of  S.  Eutrope, 
and  first  they  stoned  him,  and  after  they  beat  this 
holy  man  with  staves  and  scourges  leaded,  all 
naked,  and  after  they  cleaved  his  head  with  a 
butcher’s  axe,  and  sawed  him  with  a saw.  The 
maid  with  many  others  buried  him  by  night  in  his 
tigurion  or  lodge,  and  kept  him  in  vigils  with 
lights,  and  in  divine  obsequies,  as  long  as  she  lived. 
A little  while  after,  she  departed  out  of  this  world 
right  holily,  and  was  buried  beside  her  master  as 
she  had  required  by  her  life.  After  this,  a certain 
space  of  time,  they  of  Xaintes  edified  over  this  holy 
corpse  a much  notable  church,  in  which  all  sick 
folk  of  divers  maladies  and  sicknesses  have  been 
healed,  and  yet  daily  be,  and  also  many  prisoners 
be  also,  by  the  prayer  of  this  holy  saint,  delivered 
of  their  irons,  as  gyves,  bolts,  and  other,  which  be 
hanged  in  the  said  church  in  remembrance  that 
they  have  been  loosed  and  unbound  by  the  prayers 
of  S.  Eutrope.  S.  Denis  wrote  the  passion  and 
martyrdom  of  S.  Eutrope  in  Greek  and  sent  it 
into  Greece,  to  his  friends  that  believed  there  in 
God,  by  the  hands  of  S.  Clement  that  then  was 
pope  of  Rome,  in  exalting  and  glorifying  the  name 
of  God  which  without  end  reigneth  and  shall 
reign.  Amen. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND  275 


Thus  endeth  the  Life  of  S.  Eutrope  and  beginneth  of  jjjg 

S.  MarclaL  Martial 

In  the  time  that  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  preached 
in  Jewry,  in  the  lineage  of  Benjamin,  much  people 
came  to  him  for  to  have  that  was  necessary  to 
them,  as  well  of  drink  as  of  meat,  and  in  especial 
for  to  hear  and  understand  such  things  as  touched 
the  salvation  of  the  soul.  On  a day,  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  company,  came  a man  that  was  of  the 
said  lineage  of  Benjamin,  the  most  noble  of  all  the 
Jews,  named  by  his  right  name  Marcial,  and  his 
wife  was  called  Elizabeth,  which  had  between 
them  both  a child  of  the  age  of  fifteen  years,  that 
was  named  also  Marcial.  When  they  heard  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ  preach,  which  said  in  his  pre- 
dication : Do  ye  penance,  the  realm  of  heaven  is 
nigh  to  them  that  do  penance,  and  who  that  is  not 
regenerate  in  water  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism 
he  may  not  enter  into  the  realm  of  heaven,  then  by 
the  commandment  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ 
Marcial,  his  wife,  and  their  son  Marcial,  which 
was  a child  replenished  in  holy  doctrine,  were 
baptized  of  S.  Peter.  Then  Zaccheus  and  Joseph, 
the  which  buried  our  Lord,  were  baptized  also, 
and  many  other  of  the  people  of  the  Jews,  which 
were  over  long  to  tell  here  all  their  names.  When 
all  this  was  accomplished,  and  that  every  each 
turned  homeward  to  his  house,  the  child  Marcial 
returned  not  with  his  father  and  mother,  but  gave 
himself  all  over  to  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  and  put 
him  in  the  company  as  one  of  his  disciples,  and 
held  him  always  by  S.  Peter,  which  was  right  nigh 
of  his  kin,  and  from  then  forthon  he  was  so  enlu- 
rained  and  endoctrined  of  our  Lord  and  of  S.  Peter 
that  he  nothing  desired  so  much  as  for  to  accom- 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


276 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Marcia! 


plish  commandments  solitaries.  After  this  S.  Peter 
came  to  Rome,  and  prayed  to  Marcial  that  he 
would  go  with  him,  and  thus  as  they  had  been 
together  endoctrined  with  one  holy  doctrine,  and 
of  one  meritorious  dilection,  in  like  wise  that 
together  they  receive  the  common  reward  of  the 
joy  perdurable.  And  thus  as  they  went  they  were 
accompanied  of  some  disciples  of  Antioch,  among 
whom  were  AJphinian  and  Austridinian,  and  many 
other.  When  they  were  entered  within  Rome, 
they  were  received  of  a man  named  Marcel,  at 
that  time  consul  of  the  Romans.  Thus  as  they 
dwelled  there  God  appeared  to  S.  Peter,  and  com- 
manded him  that  he  should  send  S.  Marcial  into 
the  provinces  of  Gaul  for  to  preach  the  faith  and 
the  belief  to  the  people  which  were  in  the  bonds 
ot  the  devil  of  hell.  Then  S.  Peter  called  to  him 
S.  Marcial  and  told  him  all  by  order  that  our 
Lord  had  said  and  commanded  him.  When  S. 
Marcial  heard  that,  he  began  strongly  to  weep, 
because  he  doubted  the  far  region,  and  the  people 
which  had  no  knowledge  of  God.  When  S. 
Peter  saw  him  thus  weep  he  began  much  sweetly 
to  comfort  him  in  saying  to  him : My  holy 
brother,  be  not  heavy  ne  sorrowful,  for  God  shall 
be  always  with  thee  like  as  he  hath  promised  to 
us  saying : Lo ! I am  always  and  shall  be  with  you 
unto  the  consummation  of  the  world.  Thus,  my 
sweet  brother,  he  commanded  us  after  his  resurrec- 
tion saying:  Go  ye  unto  and  through  the  universal 
world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  all  creatures,  that 
who  shall  believe  and  shall  be  baptized  he  shall  be 
saved,  and  they  that  will  not  do  so  shall  be  damned. 
Which  things,  my  blessed  brother,  behoveth  us  to 
keep  and  put  in  effect,  to  the  end  that  we  forget 
not  the  commandments  of  God.  Anon  after 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


277 


these  blessed  words  S.  Marcial  took  leave  of  S.  The  Life 
Peter,  and  brought  with  him  the  two  disciples  S. 
aforesaid ; that  is  to  wit  Alphinian  and  Austri-  Maraml 
dinian  and  departed  like  as  God  had  commanded 
to  S.  Peter. 

Thus  then  as  they  went,  and  that  they  were 
weary  and  sore  travelled  by  the  way,  which  was 
long  and  grievous,  S.  Austridinian  departed  out  of 
this  world  and  died.  When  S.  Marcial  saw  that 
he  was  dead  he  returned  in  great  haste  to  Rome, 
and  told  to  S.  Peter  that  which  was  befallen  in 
their  way.  When  S.  Peter  had  heard  him  he 
said : Return  as  hastily  as  thou  mayest,  and  take 
my  bourdon  in  thy  hand,  and  thou  shalt  come 
where  thou  hast  left  thy  brother,  touch  his  body 
with  this  bourdon  and  anon  he  shall  arise  and  go  in 
thy  company  as  he  did  tofore.  When  S.  Marcial 
came  again  to  the  corpse  he  touched  it  with  the 
bourdon  like  as  S.  Peter  bade  him,  and  anon  he  ^ 

was  raised  from  death  to  life. 

After,  when  S.  Marcial  had  journeyed  long  by 
divers  countries  in  long  preaching  and  sowing  the 
word  of  God,  they  came  in  to  Guienne  unto  a 
castle  called  Tulle  and  there  were  received  of  a 
rich  and  a mighty  man  named  Arnold,  which  had 
a daughter  that  daily  was  tormented  with  the 
enemy.  Thus  as  S.  Marcial  entered  into  the 
house  the  fiend  began  to  cry,  saying:  I know 
well  now  that  I must  issue  out  of  the  body  of  this 
maid,  for  the  angels  of  paradise  that  be  with  thee,  ! 
Marcial,  torment  me  right  grievously  ; but  I pray 
thee  by  the  name  of  him  that  was  crucified,  whom 
thou  preachest  of,  that  thou  send  me  not  into  the 
abysm  of  hell.  Then  S.  Marcial  said  to  him : I 
conjure  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesu  Christ  that  was 
crucified  for  us,  that  thou  issue  out  of  the  body  of 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


278 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  this  maid,  and  never  return  again,  but  that  thou 
u of  8.  go  unto  a place  desert  where  bird,  ne  fowl,  ne 
Maroal  p^gou  dwelleth.  With  this  commandment  the 
maid  cast  out  the  enemy  and  she  fell  down  as 
dead.  Then  S.  Marcial  took  her  by  the  hand 
and  raised  her  up  and  delivered  her  to  her  father, 
whole  and  safe. 

Holiness  and  benignity,  with  all  humility,  shone 
in  S.  Marcial,  and  he  was  always  in  prayers. 
Another  miracle  also  our  Lord  showed  by  the 
prayers  of  S.  Marcial  in  the  same  place.  The 
prince  of  the  said  castle,  which  was  called  Nerva, 
and  was  cousin  to  the  emperor  Nero,  had  a 
daughter  which  was  suffocated  and  murdered  by 
the  fiend,  and  was  dead.  Then  the  father  and 
mother  of  the  child,  that  were  much  sorrowful  and 
heavy,  with  a great  part  of  the  people,  brought  the 
body  of  the  child  tofore  S.  Marcial,  tenderly 
weeping,  and  saying  to  him : O man  of  God,  help 
us  at  this  time;  thou  seest  how  it  is  with  us. 
When  S.  Marcial  saw  the  lamentation  and  the 
sorrow  that  they  made,  he  had  pity  on  them,  and 
said  with  an  high  voice : I pray  you  all,  as  well 
Christians  as  paynims,  that  ye  will  devoutly  pray 
God  Almighty  that  by  his  benign  grace  it  please 
him  to  give  again  the  life  to  this  child.  The  two 
disciples  of  S.  Marcial,  and  a few  of  Christian 
people  that  were  there,  put  them  to  prayers,  and 
6ith  S.  Marcial  himself  made  his  prayer,  saying : 
Sire,  I pray  thee  in  the  name  of  thy  blessed  dear 
Son  and  of  thy  good  friend  S.  Peter,  by  the 
ordinance  and  commandment  of  whom  I am  come 
hither,  that  it  please  thee  to  raise  this  child  here, 
to  the  end  that  when  she  shall  be  raised  many  may 
believe  in  thine  holy  and  precious  name.  Then 
S.  Marcial,  trusting  in  the  help  of.  God,  took  the 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


279 


child  by  the  hand  saying  to  her  : In  the  name  of  The  Life 
our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  that  of  the  Jews  for  us  was  S* 
crucified,  and  the  third  day  rose  from  death  to  Mara* 
life,  arise  up  and  stand  right  on  thy  feet.  Anon 
the  child  arose  right  upon  her  feet,  and  sith 
kneeled  down  to  the  feet  of  the  holy  man,  saying 
to  him  : O man  of  God,  I require  thee  to  baptize 
me  to  the  end  that  I may  be  saved,  and  mark  me 
with  the  sign  of  the  holy  cross,  for  otherwise  may 
none  be  saved  but  if  he  be  baptized.  Anon,  S. 

Marcial  baptized  him  and  with  him  in  the  same 
place  were  well  christened  also,  as  well  men  as 
women  three  thousand  and  six  hundred.  And 
after  this,  S.  Marcial  went  and  destroyed  the  idols 
and  brought  them  to  nought.  From  thence  went  . 

S.  Marcial  and  his  two  disciples,  and  departed  and 
came  to  Limoges,  where  they  were  benignly 
received  of  a matron  that  was  named  Susanna,  in 
whose  presence  Marcial  healed  one  that  was 
frenatic.  When  the  good  woman  Susanna  saw 
the  miracle  that  so  was  made  in  her  presence,  anon 
she  and  her  meiny  were  baptized. 

After  this  S.  Marcial  went  into  the  temple 
where  the  priests  of  the  idols  were,  the  which 
beat  him  grievously,  and  sith  put  him  in  prison. 

On  the  morn,  as  he  made  his  prayer,  there 
descended  a light  so  great  upon  him  that  men 
might  not  behold  him,  the  chains  of  iron  burst, 
and  the  doors  of  the  prison  opened,  the  keepers 
and  they  that  were  there  required  to  be  baptized, 
and  the  priests  that  had  so  beaten  him  were 
smitten  to  death  by  thunder  and  lightning. 

Then  the  others  that  were  there  came  to  S. 

Marcial,  in  to  the  prison,  and  prayed  him  that  he 
would  raise  them  that  so  were  smitten  to  death 
by  the  thunder,  promising  to  him  that  if  he  so  did 


,y  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Martial 


280 

they  all  would  be  baptized.  Then  our  Lord  by 
his  prayer  raised  them  again  from  death  to  life. 
Then  that  same  time  were  turned  to  Christian  faith 
and  baptized  twelve  thousand  creatures,  as  well  men 
as  women.  And  after  this,  on  a time  died  the 
holy  woman  Susanna,  and  totore  her  death  she 
recommended  to  S.  Martial  her  daughter,  that  was 
called  Valerienne,  which  had  promised  and  avowed 
to  our  Lord  chastity  as  long  as  she  lived.  After, 
when  the  holy  maid  knew  that  there  should  come 
to  Limoges  a lord  named  Steven,  which  was  lord 
of  all  the  province  from  the  river  of  Rhone  unto 
the  sea,  she  was  sore  afraid  lest  he  would  do  to 
her  any  grief  or  noyance  against  her  vow,  and  gave 
away  all  her  riches  to  poor  folk  for  the  love  of 
God.  When  the  said  Steven  was  come  to  Limoges, 
he  made  to  do  come  tofore  him  the  holy  maid,  to 
the  end  to  have  his  will  of  her ; but  when  she  was 
come  and  he  saw  that  she  would  not  consent  to  do 
his  will,  anon  he  made  her  head  to  be  smitten  off. 
Then  the  squire  that  beheaded  her  heard  the  angels 
sing,  that  bare  the  soul  of  the  holy  virgin  into 
heaven,  with  much  great  joy  and  solemnity,  and  anon 
he  returned  unto  his  master  and  told  him  all  that 
he  had  seen  and  heard,  and  sith  fell  down  dead 
at  his  feet.  Then  the  duke  and  all  his  company 
had  much  great  dread,  and  the  duke  himself  clad 
him  next  his  flesh  in  a sharp  hair  and  hard, 
for  great  repentance,  and  prayed  S.  Martial  that 
he  would  pray  God  that  it  might  please  him 
to  raise  his  squire  from  death  to  life,  and  he 
would  believe  in  the  faith  of  Jesu  Christ  and  be 
christened.  Anon  after  that  S.  Martial  had 
prayed,  our  Lord  raised  the  squire ; then  the  duke 
and  well  fifteen  thousand  persons  in  his  company 
were  baptized.  In  this  time  the  same  duke  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


281 


the  commandment  of  the  emperor  Nero  went  in  The  Life 
to  Italy  with  a great  company  of  men  of  arms.  S. 
When  he  had  accomplished  the  commandment  of MarcW1 
Nero,  they  went  to  Rome  for  to  see  S.  Peter, 
whom  they  found  preaching  to  the  people,  which 
people  were  barefoot  and  had  clothed  them  with 
the  hair,  lying  on  the  ground  tofore  S.  Peter  in 
demanding  him  pardon  of  their  sins.  When  S. 

Peter  saw  the  duke  and  so  much  fair  people  in 
his  company,  he  demanded  them  what  they  were, 
and  of  what  country.  Then  the  duke  told  him 
by  order  how  he  and  his  company  had  been  con- 
verted and  baptized  of  S.  Marcial. 

After,  when  they  were  departed  from  Rome, 
they  thought  that  they  would  go  see  S.  Marcial 
tofore  ere  they  returned  in  to  their  country. 

Thus  then  as  they  were  lodged  nigh  by  a river, 
and  the  son  of  the  earl  of  Poictiers  bained  him 
in  the  said  river,  the  enemy  the  devil  drowned 
and  smothered  him  to  the  death.  When  his 
father  knew  it  he  went  weeping  tenderly  to  S. 

Marcial,  and  prayed  him  to  raise  his  son  from 
death  to  life.  Then  S.  Marcial  went  to  the  place 
where  he  was  drowned  and  commanded  to  the 
fiend  to  bring  the  body  out  of  the  water,  and  that 
he  should  appear  in  a likeness  visible  tofore  them 
all.  Anon,  issued  out  of  the  water  three  fiends, 
like  Ethiopians,  more  black  than  coals,  and  had 
terrible  feet  and  eyes,  and  great  hair  that  covered 
all  the  body,  and  cast  out  at  their  mouths  and 
nostrils  fire  like  sulphur,  and  cried  like  ravens. 

When  they  had  told  to  S.  Marcial  the  harms  and 
evils  that  they  had  done,  he  commanded  them 
that  they  should  depart  and  go  into  places  desert, 
whereas  they  might  never  noy  ne  grieve  persons 
living.  S.  Marcial,  which  had  pity  and  com- 


y Google 


8 8a 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Martial 


passion  on  them  that  wept  for  the  dead  child 
raised  him  from  death  to  life,  and  then  the  child 
told,  tofore  them  all  that  were  there,  how  the  fiend 
had  drowned  and  smothered  him,  and  how  they 
would  have  bounden  him  with  chains  of  iron 
burning,  but  an  angel  of  heaven  delivered  him, 
and  showed  him  the  fire  of  purgatory,  and  from 
thence  led  him  to  the  gate  of  Paradise,  and  as  the 
fiends  required  to  have  him,  a voice  came  from 
heaven  and  commanded  that  he  should  arise  again, 
and  that  he  should  live  yet  twenty-six  years. 
When  he  had  told  him  all  this  he  gave  himself 
all  over  to  S.  Marcial,  and  from  then  forthon 
lived  in  great  abstinence  and  holy  life,  like  as  the 
angel  had  taught  him.  S.  Marcial  did  many 
miracles  and  virtues.  There  was  in  that  time  a 
woman  that  had  an  husband  sick  of  the  palsy,  to 
which  woman  S.  Marcial  delivered  his  bourdon, 
with  which  she  touched  a little  her  husband,  and 
incontinent  he  was  whole.  Another  time  the  fire 
was  so  great  in  the  city  of  Bordeaux  that  all  was 
on  a flame.  S.  Marcial  held  up  his  bourdon  against 
the  fire  and  anon  it  was  quenched. 

Another  time,  as  he  would  have  hallowed  a 
church  at  Limoges,  the  prince  aforesaid  conveyed 
and  summoned  all  the  people,  poor  and  rich,  to 
come  to  the  dedication  of  this  church,  and  when 
they  were  all  assembled,  S.  Marcial  admonished 
and  warned  them  to  be  in  very  chastity.  It 
happed  among  them  whilst  the  mass  was  on 
saying  that  there  was  a knight,  which  he  and  his 
wife  were  sore  vexed  and  troubled  with  fiends, 
and  as  they  were  brought  tofore  S.  Marcial,  he 
demanded  of  the  fiends  why  they  vexed  them  so, 
and  they  answered  to  him : Thou  hast  commanded 
them  that  the  people  maintain  chastity,  and  these 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


283 


two  have  all  night  exposed  them  in  lechery,  and  The  Life 
this  is  the  cause  that  wherefore  we  be  entered  into 
them.  S.  Marcia],  at  the  request  of  the  prince  and  Marcml 
people,  healed  them. 

This  same  year,  that  is  to  say  the  fortieth  year 
after  the  passion  of  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  the 
same,  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ,  appeared  to  him  and 
showed  how  that  hastily  he  should  depart  from 
this  world,  and  be  with  his  other  friends  in  the 
realm  of  heaven.  Then  he  did  do  assemble  all 
the  Christian  people  that  he  had  converted,  and 
to  them  made  a much  sweet  sermon  in  taking 
leave  of  them.  Soon  after  he  was  sick  of  the 
fevers,  and  then  our  Lord  appeared  to  him  with 
a great  quantity  of  angels,  which  with  much  joy 
and  gladness  bare  the  soul  of  S.  Marcial  into 
heaven:  Ubi  est  honor  et  gloria  in  secula  secu- 
lorum,  Amen.  This  S.  Marcial  of  whom  we  speak 
here  was  the  same  child,  as  some  say,  on  whom 
our  Lord  laid  his  hand  upon  his  head,  when  the 
contention  and  strife  was  among  the  apostles  which 
of  them  should  be  greatest  in  the  realm  of  heaven, 
and  then  our  Lord  set  the  child  Marcial  in  the 
midst  of  them,  laying  his  hand  upon  his  head,  as 
said  is,  and  said  to  them : If  ye  be  not  little  and 
humble  as  this  child  is,  ye  shall  not  enter  into 
heaven ; he  that  shall  be  least  among  you  he  shall 
be  greatest  in  my  realm,  as  the  gospel  maketh 
more  plain  mention.  The  which  glorious  S. 

Marcial  let  us  pray  unto,  that  he  procure  unto  our 
Lord  Jesu  Christ,  that  all  we  may  have  part  with 
him  in  the  joy  and  glory  perdurable.  Amen. 


jr 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


The  Life 
of  S. 
Genevieve 


284  THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 

Here  followeth  the  Life  of  S.  Genevieve. 

The  noble  S.  Genevieve  was  born  at  Nanterre, 
beside  Paris,  in  the  time  of  the  emperor  Honorius 
and  Theodosius  the  less,  and  was  with  her  father 
and  mother  unto  the  time  of  the  emperor  Valen- 
tinian.  Anon  after  her  nativity,  the  Holy  Ghost 
showed  unto  S.  Germain  of  Auxerre  how  she 
should  serve  God  holily  and  virginly,  the  which 
thing  he  told  to  many.  After,  she  was  sacred  of  the 
bishop  of  Chartres,  Viliques,  and  came  to  dwell  at 
Paris  full  of  virtues  and  of  miracles,  in  the  time 
of  S.  Nicasius  the  martyr,  whom  the  Hungarians 
martyred,  and  after,  in  the  time  of  S.  Remigius 
under  Childeric,  king  of  France,  and  after,  under 
Clovis  his  son,  first  Christian  king  of  France,  and 
was  named  Louis  in  his  baptism,  whom  S. 
Remigius  christened.  And  an  angel  of  paradise 
brought  to  him  an  ampul  full  of  chrism  of  which 
he  was  anointed,  and  also  his  successors,  kings  of 
France,  be  anointed  and  sacred  at  their  coronation. 
And  after,  he  was  of  good  life,  and  founded  the 
church  that  is  now  called  S.  Genevieve,  on  the 
mount  of  Paris,  in  the  honour  of  S.  Peter  and 
S.  Paul,  at  the  request  of  S.  Clotilde  his  wife,  of 
whom  the  body  resteth  in  the  said  church,  at  the 
incitation  of  S.  Genevieve,  and  S.  Remigius  did 
hallow  and  dedifie  it.  The  said  king  did  increase 
much  the  realm  of  France,  and  franchised  it  by 
his  puissance  from  the  Romans.  He  conquered 
Melun,  and  the  land  lying  by  Seine  and  Loire, 
Touraine,  Toulouse,  and  all  Guienne,  and  at  his 
coming  to  Angouleme  the  walls  of  the  city  fell 
down.  He  made  AJmaine  and  Bourgogne  his 
tributaries,  he  ordained  and  instituted  Paris  to 
be  the  chief  siege  of  the  realm,  and  he  reigned 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


285 


thirty  years,  and  after,  he  was  interred  in  the  said  The  Life 
church,  the  year  of  our  Lord  five  hundred  and  of  S. 
fourteen.  In  the  time  of  the  said  king  lived  the  Gooe****® 
said  virgin,  unto  the  time  of  king  Clothaire  his 
son,  of  which  virgin  the  soul  flew  into  heaven  and 
the  body  abode  in  earth,  in  the  said  church,  in 
which  she  is  yet  whole  and  honorably  interred, 
and  devoutly  worshipped  by  the  good  and  devout 
Christian  people. 

In  the  time  that  the  said  virgin  S.  Genevieve 
was  a child,  S.  Germain  of  Auxerre  and  S.  Lew 
of  Troyes,  elect  of  the  prelates  of  France,  for  to 
go  quench  an  heresy  that  was  in  Great  Britain, 
now  called  England,  came  to  Nanterre  for  to  be 
lodged  and  harboured,  the  people  came  against 
them  for  to  have  their  benison.  Among  the 
people,  S.  Germain,  by  the  enseignements  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  espied  out  the  little  maid  S. 
Genevieve,  and  made  her  to  come  to  him,  and 
kissed  her  head  and  demanded  her  name,  and 
whose  daughter  she  was,  and  the  people  about  her 
said  that  her  name  was  Genevieve,  and  her  father 
Severe,  and  her  mother  Geronce,  which  came 
unto  him,  and  the  holy  man  said : Is  this  child 
yours  ? They  answered : Yea.  Blessed  be  ye, 
said  the  holy  man,  when  God  hath  given  to  you 
so  noble  lineage,  know  ye  for  certain  that  the  day 
of  her  nativity,  the  angels  sang  and  hallowed  great 
mystery  in  heaven  with  great  joy  and  gladness; 
she  shall  be  of  so  great  merit  against  God.  And 
of  her  good  life  and  conversation  many  shall  take 
ensample,  that  they  shall  leave  their  sin  and  shall 
convert  them  to  God,  and  shall  live  religiously,  by 
which  they  shall  have  pardon  and  joy  perdurable. 

Then  he  said  to  Genevieve : My  daughter  tell  to 
me,  and  be  not  ashamed,  if  ye  will  be  sacred  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


s 86 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  lire  in  virginity  unto  the  death,  as  espouse  of  Jesu 
of  S.  Christ  ? The  maid  answered : Holy  father,  ye 
®caevic*c  demand  that  I desire ; there  lacketh  no  more  but 
that  by  your  prayers  our  Lord  will  accomplish  my 
devotion.  The  holy  man  said : Have  firm  belief 
in  God,  and  prove  by  works  the  good  things  that 
ye  believe  in  your  heart  and  say  with  your  mouth, 
and  our  Lord  shall  give  you  force  and  virtue.  S. 
Germain  held  his  hand  on  her  head  till  he  came 
unto  the  minster,  there  he  gave  to  the  people  the 
benison.  S.  Germain  said  to  the  father  and  mother 
of  the  maid  that  they  should  bring  her  again  on  the 
mom  to  him.  When  she  was  brought  again  on 
the  mom,  S.  Germain  saw  in  her  a sign  celestial, 
I wot  not  what,  and  said  to  her:  God  thee 
saluteth,  Genevieve.  Daughter,  rememberest  thou 
what  thou  promisedst  to  me  yesterday  of  the 
virginity  of  thy  body  ? Holy  father,  said  the  maid, 
I remember  well  that,  and  by  the  help  of  God  I 
desire  and  think  to  accomplish  my  purpose.  Then 
the  holy  man  looked  on  the  ground  and  saw  a 
penny  signed  with  the  cross,  which  came  by  the 
grace  and  will  of  God;  he  took  it  up  and  gave 
it  her  and  said : F air  daughter  take  this  and  bear 
it  in  mind  of  Jesu  Christ  your  espouse,  and  suffer 
not  about  you  none  other  arrayment  of  gold  ne 
silver,  ne  of  precious  stones,  for  if  the  beauty  of 
this  world  surmount  a little  your  thought,  ye  shall 
lose  the  goods  of  heaven.  He  commended  her  to 
God,  and  prayed  her  that  she  would  remember 
him  in  her  orisons  and  prayers,  and  recommended 
her  to  father  and  mother.  The  two  holy  bishops 
went  from  thence  into  England,  where  were 
heretics  against  the  faith,  which  said  that  children 
bora  of  father  and  mother  baptized  had  no  need 
to  be  christened,  which  is  not  truth,  for  our  Lord 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


287 


Jesu  Christ  saith  clearly,  in  the  gospel,  that  none  The  Life 
may  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  if  he  be  S.  # 
not  regenerate  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  **  evieve 
that  is  to  say,  regenerate  by  the  sacrament  of 
baptism.  By  this  scripture,  and  by  semblable,  the 
holy  prelates  destroyed  their  false  creance  and 
belief,  and  by  virtue  also  and  by  miracles,  for  in  a 
solemnity  of  Easter,  by  many  that  were  new 
baptized,  in  singing  Alleluia  they  chased  and  drove 
away  their  enemies  of  Scotland,  and  strangers 
of  other  places,  that  were  come  for  to  grieve 
them. 

It  happed  on  a day  that  Geronce,  the  mother 
of  the  holy  maid  Genevieve,  went  on  an  holy  and 
festal  day  toward  the  minster,  and  her  daughter  went 
after,  saying  that  the  faith  that  she  had  promised  to 
S.  Germain  she  should  keep  by  the  help  of  God, 
and  that  she  should  oft  go  to  the  minster  to  the 
end  that  she  might  desire  to  be  the  espouse  of 
Jesu  Christ,  and  that  she  might  be  worthy  of  his 
love.  The  mother  was  angry  and  smote  her  on 
the  cheek.  God  avenged  the  child  that  the 
mother  became  blind,  and  that  in  twenty-one 
months  she  saw  not.  When  the  mother  had  been 
long  in  this  pain,  which  much  annoyed  her,  she 
remembered  of  the  goodness  that  S.  Germain  had 
said  of  her  daughter,  and  called  her  and  said: 

My  daughter,  go  to  the  pit  and  fetch  me  water ; 
the  maid  went  hastily  ; when  she  was  at  the  pit 
she  began  to  weep  because  her  mother  had  lost 
her  sight  for  her  sake,  and  took  up  water  and  bare 
it  to  her  mother.  The  mother  stretched  her 
hands  to  heaven,  and  took  the  water  with  great 
faith  and  reverence,  and  made  her  daughter  to 
sign  her  with  the  sign  of  the  holy  cross  and  wash 
her  eyes,  and  anon  she  began  for  to  see  a little. 

VOL.  in.  t 


Digitized  by 


Google 


288 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  When  she  had  twice  or  thrice  washed,  her  sight 
of  S.  capje  whole  to  her  again  as  it  had  been  tofore. 
i ea^yieve^y^r  this  it  happed  that  the  holy  maid  was 
^ offered  to  the  bishop  of  Chartres,  Vtliques,  for  to 
be  sacred  with  two  other  elder  maidens ; for  men 
offered  them  after  their  age.  But  the  holy  bishop 
knew  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  Genevieve  was  the 
most  worthy  and  digne,  and  said  to  her,  that  was 
behind,  that  she  should  come  before,  for  God  had 
then  sanctified  her*  After  the  death  of  her 
father  and  her  mother  the  holy  damsel'  came  and 
dwelt  at  Paris  for  to  assay  and  prove  her  there, 
and  for  to  avail  the  more  she  Was  sick  of  the 
palsy,  so  much  that  it  seemed  that  her  members 
were  disjoined  and  departed  that  one  from  that 
other,  whereof  she  was  so  sore  tormented  that 
during  three  days  she  was  kept  as  for  dead,  for 
there  appeared  on  her  no  sign  of  life  save  that  her 
jowes  were  a little  red.  In  this  space  and  time, 
as  she  confessed  after,  an  angel  led  her  in  spirit 
whereas  the  rest  was  of  good  folk,  and  where  the 
torment  was  of  evil  people.  Afterward  she  showed 
to  many  the  secrets  of  their  consciences,  as  she 
that  was  taught  and  enseigned  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
The  second  time  S.  Germain  returned  from 
England  and  came  to  Paris  the  people  almost  all 
went  against  him  with  great  joy,  and  tofore  all 
other  things  S.  Germain  demanded  how  Genevieve 
did,  but  the  people,  which  more  is  inclined  to  say 
evil  of  good  people  than  well,  answered  that  of  her 
was  nothing,  in  blaming  her,  which  was  to  her  a 
praising.  Of  other  men’s  praising  is  none  the 
better,  ne  of  others  blaming  is  none  the  worse, 
therefore  the  holy  man  set  nought  of  their  jangling, 
but  as  soon  as  he  entered  into  the  city  he  went 
straight  to  the  house  of  the  holy  virgin  whom  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


289 


saluted  in  so  great  humility  that  all  they  marvelled,  The  Life 
and  showed  to  them  that  dispraised  her,  the  S.  . 
ground  wet  of  her  tears,  and  recited  to  them  the  Genevieve 
beginning  of  her  life,  and  how  he  found  at  Nanterre 
that  she  was  chosen  of  God,  and  recommended 

her  to  the  people.  „ - 

Tidings  came  to  Paris  that  Attila,  the  felon  / 
king  of  Hungary,  had  enterprised  to  destroy  and 
waste  the  parts  of  France,  and  to  subdue  them  to 
his  domination.  The  burgesses  of  Paris,  for  great 
dread  that  they  had,  sent  their  goods  into  other 
cities  more  sure.  S.  Genevieve  warned  and  ad- 
monished the  good  women  of  the  town  that  they 
should  wake  in  fastings  and  in  orisons,  by  which 
they  might  assuage  the  ire  of  our  Lord  and  eschew 
the  tyranny  of  their  enemies,  like  as  did  sometime 
the  two  holy  women  Judith  and  Esther.  They 
obeyed  her,  and  were  long  and  many  days  in  the 
church  in  wakings,  fastings  and  in  orisons.  She 
said  to  the  burgesses  that  they  should  not  remove 
their  goods,  ne  send  them  out  of  the  town  of  Paris, 
for  the  other  cities  that  they  supposed  should  be 
more  sure,  should  be  destroyed  and  wasted,  but 
by  the  grace  of  God,  Paris  should  have  none  harm.. 

And,  some  had  indignation  at  her,  and  said  that  a 
false  prophet  was  risen  and  appeared  in  their  time, 
and  began  among  them  to  ask  and  treat  whether 
they  should  drown  her  or  stone  her.  Whilst  they 
were  thus  treating,  as  God  would,  came  to  Paris, 
after  the  decease  of  S.  Germain,  the  archdeacon 
of  Auxerre,  and  when  he  understood  that  they 
treated  together  of  her  death,  he  came  to  them, 
and  said:  Fair  sirs,  for  God’s  sake  do  not  this 
mischief,  for  she  of  whom  ye  treat,  S.  Germain 
witnesseth  that  she  was  chosen  of  God  in  lier 
mother’ 8 belly,  and  lo ! here  be  the  letters  that  he 


Digitized  by  Goode 


290 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  hath  sent  to  her  in  which  he  recommendeth  him 
of  S.  t0  her  prayers.  When  the  burgesses  heard  these 
Genevieve  worc[8  recjted  by  him  of  S.  Germain,  and  saw  the 
letters,  they  marvelled  and  feared  God,  and  left 
their  evil  counsel  and  did  no  more  thereto.  Thus 
our  Lord  kept  her  from  harm,  which  keepeth 
alway  them  that  be  his,  and  defendeth,  after  that 
the  apostle  saith,  and  for  her  love  did  so  much 
that  the  tyrants  approached  not  Paris,  thank  and 
glory  to  God  and  honour  to  the  virgin.  This 
holy  maid  did  great  penance  in  tormenting  her 
body  all  her  life,  and  became  lean  for  to  give 
good  example.  For  sith  she  was  of  the  age  of 
fifteen  years  unto  fifty,  she  fasted  every  day  save 
Sunday  and  Thursday.  In  her  refection  she  had 
nothing  but  barley  bread,  and  sometime  beans, 
the  which,  sodden  after  fourteen  days  or  three 
weeks,  she  ate  for  all  delices.  Always  she  was 
in  prayers  in  wakings  and  in  penances,  she  drank 
never  wine  ne  other  liquor,  that  might  make  her 
drunk,  in  all  her  life.  When  she  had  lived  and 
used  this  life  fifty  years,  the  bishops  that  were 
that  time,  saw  and  beheld  that  she  was  over  feeble 
by  abstinence  as  for  her  age,  and  warned  her  to 
increase  a little  her  fare.  The  holy  woman  durst 
not  gainsay  them,  for  our  Lord  saith  of  the 
. prelates  : Who  heareth  you  heareth  me,  and  who 
despiseth  you,  despiseth  me,  and  so  she  began  by 
obedience  to  eat  with  her  bread,  fish  and  milk, 
and  how  well  that,  she  so  did,  she  beheld  the 
heaven  and  wept,  whereof  it  is  to  believe  that  she 
saw  appertly  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  after  the  promise 
of  the  gospel  that  saith  that.  Blessed  be  they  that 
be  clean  of  heart  for  they  shall  see  God ; she  had 
her  heart  and  body  pure  and  clean.  There  be 
twelve  virtues  virginal,  saith  Hermes  Pastor,  with- 


Digitized  by  VjOOQiC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


291 

out  which  no  virgin  may  be  agreeable  to  God,  that  The  Life 
is  to  wit : F aith,  abstinence,  patience,  magna-  ^ 
nimity,  simplesse,  innocence,  concord,  charity, 
discipline,  chastity,  truth,  and  prudence.  These 
virtues  accomplished  the  holy  virgin  by  work,  she 
taught  and  enseigned  by  word,  and  showed  oft  by 
ensample. 

Oft  and  tofore  all  other  holy  places,  she  visited 
the  place  whereas  rested  S.  Denis  and  his  fellows, 
and  had  great  devotion  to  edify  upon  the  said  holy 
bodies  a church,  but  she  had  not  whereof.  On  a 
time  came  to  her  the  priests,  as  oft  they  had  done 
tofore,  to  whom  she  said:  Reverend  Fathers  in 
God,  I pray  and  require  that  each  of  you  do  his 
power  and  his  devoir  to  assemble  matter  whereof 
might  be  made  and  edified  a church  in  the  honour 
of  the  glorious  martyrs  S.  Denis  and  his  fellows, 
for  the  place  where  they  rest  ought  much  to  be 
worshipped  and  doubted,  which  first  taught  to  our 
ancestors  the  faith.  Dame,  answered  the  priests, 
we  would  fain,  and  have  great  will  thereto,  but  we 
can  get  no  chalk  ne  lime.  Then  said  the  holy 
virgin  with  a glad  cheer  in  prophesying  as  she 
that  was  replenished  by  the  Holy  Ghost : Go  ye 
I pray  you  to  Paris  upon  the  great  bridge,  and 
bring  that  ye  shall  find  there.  They  went  thither 
and  abode  there  a while,  marvelled  and  abashed. 

And  anon  came  by  them  two  swineherds  speaking 
together,  of  which  that  one  said:  As  I went 
yesterday  after  one  of  my  sows,  I found  a fournil 
of  lime  marvellously  great,  that  other  answered  : 

And  I found  in  the  wood  under  the  root  of  a tree 
that  the  wind  had  thrown  down  a fournil  of  lime 
of  which  I trow  was  never  none  taken  away. 

When  the  priests  heard  this  they  had  great  ad- 
miration, and  blessed  our  Lord  that  had  given  such 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


292 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  grace  to  Genevieve  his  handmaid.  They  de- 
of  S.  manded  where  the  fournils  were,  and  after 
Genevieve  returaed  and  told  to  the  virgin  what  they  had 
found.  She  began  to  weep  for  joy,  and  as  soon 
as  the  priests  were  gone  and  departed,  she  set  on 
her  knees  and  was  all  the  night  in  orisons  and  in 
tears,  in  requiring  help  of  God  to  perform  this 
work,  and  on  the  morn  early,  all  mat  and  travailed 
of  waking,  she  went  to  Genese,  a good  priest,  and 
prayed  him  that  he  would  do  his  pain  and  labour 
that  the  church  might  be  edified,  and  told  him 
tidings  of  the  lime.  When  Genese  heard  this  he 
was  all  amarvelled,  and  fell  down  to  her  feet  and 
promised  to  her  that  night  and  day  he  would  do 
his  labour  to  accomplish  her  commandment.  By 
the  help  of  God  and  of  S.  Genevieve,  and  of  the 
people  of  Paris,  the  said  church  was  begun  in  the 
honour  of  the  blessed  martyrs  S.  Denis,  S.  Rustique, 
and  S.  Eleuthere  which  now  is  called  S.  Denis 
de  Lestree.  There  be  yet  the  holy  bodies  where 
our  Lord  showeth  fair  miracles,  for  as  the  work- 
men entended  to  make  the  edificee  each  after  his 
craft,  it  happed  that  their  drink  failed  and  was 
done,  and  Genese  the  priest  said  to  Genevieve, 
which  knew  not  hereof,  that  she  should  talk  with 
the  workmen  so  long  that  he  might  go  to  Paris 
and  fetch  drink.  When  she  heard  this  she  de- 
manded for  the  vessel  that  they  had  emptied,  and 
it  was  brought  to  her ; she  made  them  to  depart 
from  her.  Then  she  kneeled  down  on  her  knees 
and  prayed  God  with  warm  tears  to  help  her,  and 
when  she  felt  that  our  Lord  had  heard  her  prayer, 
she  arqse  up,  and  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon 
the  said  vessel,  and  a marvellous  thing  happed, 
for  the  vessel  was  full.  . The  workmen  drank 
their  bellyful,  and  as  oft  as  they  would,  unto  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


293 


time  the  church  was  perfectly  made,  whereof  they  The  Life 
thanked  our  Lord.  # 

.The  holy  virgin  had  devotion  to  wake  the Genevieve 
night  that  our  Lord  rose  from  death  to  life,  after 
the  custom  and  statutes  of  ancient  fathers.  It 
happed  on  a time  that  she  put  her  on  the  way, 
tofore  day,  to  go  to  the  said  church  of  S.  Denis, 
and  made  to  bear  a candle  burning  tofore  her. 

The  night  was  dark,  the  wind  great,  and  it  rained 
fast,  which  quenched  the  light  of  the  candle. 

The  maidens  that  were  in  her  company  were  sore 
troubled ; she  asked  after  the  candle,  and  as  soon 
as  she  had  it  in  her  hand  it  was  lighted  by  God’s 
will  again,  and  so  she  bare  it  burning  unto  the 
church.  

Another  time  whein  she  had  ended  her  prayer, 
a candle  that  she  held,  lighted  in  her  hand  by 
the  grace  of  God.  Semblably  in  her  cell,  on  a \ 
time  was  a candle  lighted  in  her  hand  without  any 
fire  of  this  world,  of  which  candle  many  sick  folk 
by  their  faith  and  reverence  have  been  healed. 

That  taper  is  kept  yet  at  Notre  Dame  de  Paris. 

A woman  which  by  the  temptation  of  the  devil, 
which  to  his  power  always  deceiveth  the  good, 
stole  away  her  shoes,  but  as  soon  as  she  was  at 
home  she  lost  her  sight.  When  she  saw  that  our 
Lord  had  avenged  the  wrong  that  she  had  done 
to  the  virgin,  she  did  her  to  be  led  to  her  with 
the  theft.  When  she  came  tofore  the  holy  virgin 
she  fell  down  to  her  feet,  and  required  her  of 
forgiveness  and  restoring  of  her  sight.  Genevieve, 
that  was  right  debonair,  took  her  up  from  the 
ground,  and  in  smiling,  gave . to  her  the  sight  ; 
again  of  her  eyes. 

The  holy  virgin  on  a time  went  to  Laon,  and 
the  people  of  the  town  went  out  against  her,  among 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


294 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  whom  were  the  father  and  mother  of  a maid  that 
of  S.  been  nine  years  so  paralytic  that  none  might 
Genevieve  8j10W  tbe  jointure  of  her  members.  They  besought 
and  required  S.  Genevieve  that  she  would  visit 
the  sick  maid.  She  went  and  saw  her,1  and  sith 
made  her  prayer  as  she  was  accustomed,  and  after, 
handled  the  members  of  the  maid,  and  commanded 
her  to  do  on  her  clothes  and  hosen  and  shoes. 
Incontinent  she  arose  in  good  health  in  such  wise 
that  she  went  unto  the  church  with  the  people. 
The  folk  that  saw  this,  blest  our  Lord,  that  had 
given  such  grace  to  his  damsel  Genevieve,  and 
when  she  returned  they  conveyed  her,  singing  with 
great  joy.  The  king  of  France,  Childeric,  how 
be  it  he  was  a paynim,  held  her  in  great  reverence, 
so  did  also  the  barons  of  France,  for  the  fair 
miracles  that  she  did  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesu  Christ. 

Whereof  it  happed  on  a time  that  the  said  king 
held  certain  prisoners  judged  to  death,  but  because 
Genevieve  should  not  demand  them,  he  issued  out 
of  Paris,  and  made  to  shut  the  gates  after  him. 
The  holy  virgin  knew  it  anon,  and  went  hastily 
after  him  for  to  help  to  deliver  them.  As  soon 
as  she  came  to  the  gates,  they  opened  without  key, 
all  the  people  seeing  which,  thought  it  a great 
wonder.  She  pursued  the  king  and  obtained  grace 
for  the  prisoners. 

■ In  the  parts  of  the  Orient  beyond  Antioch,  was  a 
good  man  named  Simeon,  which  had  despised  this 
world,  and  was  of  marvellous  holy  life,  which  de- 
manded of  S.  Genevieve  of  the  merchants  that  went 
/ in  to  those  parts,  and  by  them  he  saluted  her  much 
t honourably,  and  recommended  him  unto  her  prayers. 
It  was  a great  marvel  that  the  holy  man  which  had 
never  seen  ne  heard  speak  of  her  did  do  greet  her  by 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


295 


her  name.  Verily  the  friends  of  God  that  know  The  Life 
his  will  and  do  thereafter,  have  tidings  that  one  of  S. 
from  that  other  by  administration  of  the  Holy  Genevieve 
Ghost,  they  shall  never  be  separate  ne  departed,  , 
as  S.  Ambrose  being  at  Milan  knew  of  the  death  J 
of  S.  Martin  at  Tours. 

At  Meaux  was  a noble  damsel  which  was  named 
by  her  proper  name  Celine,  which,  when  she  had 
heard  of  the  grace  that  God  had  given  to  S. 
Genevieve,  she  required  her  to  change  her  habit. 

A young  man  had  fianced  and  trothed  her,  which 
had  great  indignation  when  he  heard  of  those 
tidings,  and  came  to  Meaux  in  a great  ire,  where 
the  two  virgins  dwelt;  and  when  they  knew  of 
his  coming  they  fled  unto  the  church.  There 
happed  a fair  miracle,  for  as  they  came  to  the 
church  door,  which  was  locked  and  fast  shut, 
the  door  that  was  so  locked  opened  by  his  gree 
by  himself  5 thus  S.  Genevieve  delivered  S.  Celine 
from  peril  and  from  the  contagion  of  the  world, 
the  which  persevered  in  abstinence,  and  in  chastity 
to  her  end.  In  this  time  the  said  Celine  offered 
to  S.  Genevieve  one,  her  chamberer,  which  had 
lain  sick  two  years  and  might  not  go;  the  holy 
virgin  handled  her  members  with  her  worthy 
hands  and  anon  she  was  whole  and  in  good  point'. 

There  were  brought  to  her  twelve  men  that 
were  wood  and  beset  with  devils,  unto  Paris, 
which  were  over  hard  bestead  and  tormented  of 
the  enemy,  the  virgin  had  great  pity,  and  went  to 
prayer  and  orisons  in  requiring  our  Lord,  with 
salt  tear 8,  that  bv  his  grace  and  goodness  he  would 
deliver  them  ot  this  pestilence;  and  as  she  per- 
severed in  her  prayers,  they  were  hanged  in  the 
air  in  such  manner  as  they  touched  nothing.  She 
arose  from  her  prayer,  and  said  that  they  should 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


296 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  go  to  S.  Denis,  the  wood  men  answered  that  they 
°f  S.  might  not  but  she  unbound  them ; the  virgin  which 
Gtae7ievc  was  for  them  in  great  sorrow  commanded  that  they 
should  go ; then  anon  they  suffered  them  to  be  led 
secretly,  their  hands  bound  behind  their  backs. 
She  went  after  them,  and  when  she  was  in  the 
church  of  S.  Denis,  she  stretched  herself  on  the 
ground  in  orisons  and  in  weepings.  Thus  as  she  per- 
severed in  prayers  and  weepings,  the  wood  men  cried 
with  a high  voice  that  they  approached  whom  the 
virgin  called  in  to  their  help.  None  ought  to  doubt 
that  the  enemy,  that  saw  that  he  must  needs  issue 
and  go  out,  signified  by  the  mouth  of  the  demoniacs, 
that  the  apostles,  martyrs  and  other  saints,  that 
the  holy  virgin  called,  came  unto  her  help  by  the 
gift  of  God,  which  is  ready  to  do  the  will  of  them 
that  dread  him  and  call  him  in  truth.  When  the 
holy  virgin  heard  this  that  they  said,  she  arose 
up  and  blessed  each  after  other  with  the  sign  of 
the  cross,  and  anon  they  were  delivered  of  the 
enemies.  They  that  were  present  felt  so  great 
stench  that  they  doubted  nothing  but  the  souls 
were  delivered  from  the  vexation  of  the  devil, 
and  blessed  our  Lord  for  this  miracle. 

There  was  at  Bourges  a damsel,  which  heard  speak 
of  the  great  renomee  of  this  holy  saint,  and  came 
to  Paris  for  to  speak  to  her.  She  had  been  sacred, 
but  after  the  consecration  she  had  lost  her  virginity. 
The  holy  Genevieve  demanded  of  her  if  she  was 
a virgin  nun,  or  wife,  or  a widow.  She  answered 
that  she  was  a virgin  sacred ; Genevieve  said  nay, 
telling  to  her  the  place  and  time  of  her  defloration 
and  the  man  that  had  done  the  fait.  When  she 
saw  that  it  was  for  nought  that  she  said  she  was 
a virgin,  her  conscience  remorsed  her,  and  fell 
down  to  her  feet  in  requiring  pardon.  In  sem- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


297 


blable  wise  the  holy  Genevieve  discovered  to  many  The  Life 
the  secrets  of  their  consciences,  which  be  not  here  S.  # 
written  because  it  were  over  noyous  and  long  to  Genevlcve 
write. 

A woman  whom  the  holy  virgin  had  healed,  : 
had  a child  of  the  age  of  four  years  which  fell  { 
in  a pit,  he  was  therein  the  space  of  three  hours. 

The  mother  came  and  drew  it  out,  and  bare  it  all 
dead  unto  the  saint,  in  rending  her  hair  and  beating 
her  breast  and  paps,  and  weeping  bitterly,  and  laid 
the  child  dead  at  her  feet.  The  holy  virgin 
covered  it  with  her  mantle,  and  after,  she  fell  down 
in  her  prayers  and  wept,  and  anon  after,  when 
she  ceased  of  her  weeping,  our  Lord  showed  a 
fair  miracle,  for  the  child  that  was  dead  revived,  \ 
the  which  was  baptized  at  Easter  after,  and  was  1 
named  Celonier  because  she  was  raised  in  the  cell 
of  S.  Genevieve.  There  came  from  Meaux  a j 
man  to  this  holy  virgin  which  had  his  hand  dried  j 
unto  the  wrist,  and  she  handled  his  joints  and  j 
fingers,  and  made  thereon  the  sign  of  the  cross, 
and  anon  the  hand  became  all  whole. 

Genevieve  that  knew  well,  that  our  Lord  Jesu 
Christ  was  baptized  the  day  of  Epiphany,  and  after, 
went  into  desert  in  giving  enseignement  to  them 
that  be  regenerate  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  to 
fast,  wake  and  adore  busily,  and  to  accomplish  by 
work  the  grace  that  they  have  taken  in  the  baptism, 
by  the  ensample  of  sweet  Jesu  Christ.  Then 
entered  the  holy  virgin  in  to  her  cell  the  Sunday 
tofore  the  said  feast,  and  abode  there  as  recluse 
unto  the  Thursday,  absolute  in  waking,  in  prayers, 
in  fastings  and  orisons.  Thither  came  a woman 
to  see  her,  more  for  curiosity  than  for  good  faith, 
and  therefore  God  punished  her,  for  as  soon  as 
she  approached  the  door  of  the  cell  she  lost  her 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


298 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  sight  and  became  blind,  but  the  holy  maid  by 
ofS.  her  debonairty,  and  by  her  prayer  gat  her  sight 
uenevieve  and  by  the  sign  of  the  holy  cross,  when 

she  issued  out  of  her  cell  in  the  end  of  Lent. 
f In  the  time  that  the  city  of  Paris  was  assieged 
by  the  term  of  ten  years,  like  as  the  ancient 
histories  rehearse,  there  followed  so  great  famine 
and  hunger  that  many  died  for  hunger.  The 
holy  virgin,  that  pity  constrained  her,  went  to 
I the  Seine  for  to  go  fetch  by  ship  some  victuals. 
\ When  she  came  unto  a place  of  Seine,  whereas 
of  custom  ships  were  wont  to  perish,  she  made 
\ the  ship  to  be  drawn  to  the  rivage  and  commanded 
\ to  cut  down  a tree  that  was  in  the  water,  and  she 
\ set  her  to  prayer.  Then,  as  the  ship  should  have 
j smitten  upon  the  tree  it  fell  down,  and  two  wild 
heads,  grey  and  horrible,  issued  thereout,  which 
stank  so  sore  that  the  people  there  were  envenomed 
by  the  space  of  two  hours,  and  never  after  perished 
ship  there,  thank  be  to  God  and  to  his  holy  saint. 

Unto  Arcy,  the  castle,  went  this  holy  virgin, 
and  there  came  against  her  a great  lord  which 
required  her  that  she  should  visit  his  wife,  which 
had  had  long  time  the  palsy.  The  holy  virgin 
went  and  visited  her  which  had  been  long  sick, 
with  prayers  and  orisons,  and  after,  blessed  her 
with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  commanded  her 
that  she  should  arise.  She  then,  that  had  been 
four  years  sick  and  might  not  help  herself,  arose, 
which  seeing,  all  the  people  thanked  our  Lord. 

From  Arcy  she  went  to  Troyes  in  Champagne. 
The  people  came  to  meet  with  her,  and  offered 
to  her  great  multitude  of  sick  people  without 
number.  She  blessed  them  and  signed  them  with 
the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  incontinent  they  were 
healed  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people,  which  mar- 


Digitized  by  CjOOQIC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


299 


veiled  much  and  rendered  thankings  to  our  Lord.  The  Life 
There  was  brought  to  her  a man,  which  by  the  S.  b 
punition  of  God  was  made  blind,  because  he  'jenevlcve 
wrought  on  the  Sunday ; and  a blind  maid  also. 

The  holy  virgin  blessed  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
anon  their  sight  was  restored  to  them.  There  was 
a sub-deacon  present  and  saw  this ; he  went  and 
fetched  a child  which  had  been  sick  ten  years  of 
the  fevers  right  sore,  the  holy  virgin  did  do  bring 
holy  water  and  blessed  it  and  gave  him  drink, 
and  that  done,  by  the  grace  of  God,  the  child  was 
in  good  health.  In  this  time  many  took  of  the 
cuttings  of  her  vesture  by  devotion,  whereof  many 
sick  were  healed,  and  many  vexed  by  spirits  were 
delivered  and  remised  in  to  their  good  mind. 

From  Arcy  returned  the  holy  virgin  to  Paris 
with  eleven  ships  charged  with  victual.  Wind, 
tempest,  and  orage  assailed  them  so  strongly  that 
they  weened  to  have  perished  without  remedy,  i 
the  holy  virgin  lift  up  her  hands  to  heaven  j 
requiring  help  of  our  Lord,  and  anon  the  tempest  | 
ceased.  Then  Bessus,  a priest  that  was  present 
and  saw  it,  which  tofore  had  trembled  for  fear, 
began  to  sing  for  joy : Cantemus  domino  gloriose. 

All  that  there  were  thanked  our  Lord  that  had  ! 
saved  them  by  the  prayer  of  the  damsel  Genevieve. 

When  the  goods  came  to  Paris  that  she  had 
brought,  she  departed  them  and  gave  for  the  love 
of  God  to  some  poor,  wool,  and  to  others  whole 
loaves  of  bread,  and  sometimes  she  so  hasted  for  ; 
pity  that  she  took  the  loaves  hot  out  of  the  oven 
secretly  and  gave  it  to  the  poor.  The  women 
marvelled  why  she  took  their  loaves,  but  they  \ 
spake  ne  said  nothing,  and  they  much  doubted  \ 
that  they  should  not  find  their  count  ne  tale.  But  ! 


v Google 


3oo 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  notwithstanding  that  she  had  so  taken,  by  the 
of  God  they  found  all  their  loaves  and 
lacked  none,  by  the  merits  of  the  holy  saint.  Her 
< hope  was  nothing  in  worldly  things,  but  in 

heavenly,  for  in  the  holy  scriptures  that  saith: 

Who  so  giveth  to  the  poor  lendeth  for  a vaile. 
The  reward  which  they  receive  that  give  to  poor 
people,  the  Holy  Ghost  had  showed  to  her  long 
tofore,  and  therefore  she  ceased  not  to  weep,  to 
adore,  and  to  do  works  of  pity,  for  she  knew  well 
that  she  was  none  other  in  this  world  but  a pilgrim 
passing. 

There  was  at  Meaux  a burgess  that  by  the 
space  of  four  years  he  might  not  hear  ne  go,  he 
did  him  be  brought  to  the  holy  virgin  which  dwelt 
at  Paris,  and  required  her  that  she  would  restore 
to  him  his  health  and  hearing.  She  touched  his 
ears  and  blessed  him,  and  anon  he  was  whole,  and 
went  and  heard  as  he  did  before,  thanking  our 
Lord. 

On  a time  the  holy  virgin  went  to  Orleans.  A 
woman  named  Fraterne  was  in  great  sorrow  for 
her  daughter  that  Jay  dying.  Anon,  as  she  wist  the 
coming  of  the  holy  virgin,  she  went  to  her  to  S. 
Aiguen  where  she  found  her  in  prayer.  Fraterne 
fell  down  to  her  feet  saying : Dame  Genevieve  give 
me  again  Claude  my  daughter.  When  Genevieve 
saw  the  good  faith  of  her,  she  said : Discomfort 
thee  nothing,  thy  daughter  is  in  health,  the  which 
by  the  marvellous  puissance  of  God,  at  the  word 
of  the  holy  virgin,  was  brought  from  the  wicket  of 
death,  and  came  all  whole  against  her  mother,  and 
met  with  her  at  the  portal  of  the  house.  The 
people  thanked  our  Lord  for  this  fair  miracle. 

In  the  said  city  there  was  a servant  culpable 
against  his  master ; the  holy  maid  prayed  his 


Digitized  by  Google 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND* 


301 


master  that  he  would  forgive  him  his  trespass.  The  Life 
The  master,  as  felonous  and  proud,  deigned  not  to  °f  S.  # 
do  it  at  her  request.  Then  said  the  holy  virgin  : ^enevleve 
Though  ye  despise  me,  our  Lord  will  not  have 
me  in  despite.  As  soon  as  he  was  at  home  he 
was  taken  with  a hot  fever  ague,  which  vexed 
him  in  such  wise  that  he  might  not  sleep  of  all  the 
night.  On  the  morn  he  came  to  the  holy  virgin, 
running  with  open  mouth,  like  a bear  of  Almaine, 
the  tongue  hanging  out,  and  foaming  like  a boar, 
requiring  pardon,  which  would  give  no  pardon. 

The  saint  had  pity  on  him  and  blessed  him,  and 
the  fever  left  him,  thus  made  she  the  master  whole 
and  the  servant  excused. 

From  Orleans  the  holy  woman  went  to  Tours 
by  the  water  of  Loire,  where  she  suffered  many 
perils.  When  she  arrived  at  Tours  great  foison 
of  demoniacs  came  against  her  out  of  the  church  of 
S.  Martin,  and  the  spirits  cried  by  the  mouth  of 
them  that  were  mad  and  vexed,  which  were  burnt 
by  the  merits  of  S.  Martin  and  S.  Genevieve,  and 
the  perils  that  the  virgin  had  in  the  water  of  Loire, 
they  had  done  it  by  envy.  The  holy  virgin  went 
into  the  church  or  S.  Martin  whereas  she  healed 
many  demoniacs  by  prayers  and  by  the  sign  of  the 
cross,  and  the  demoniacs  said  at  the  hour  of 
the  torment  that,  the  fingers  of  the  saint  burnt 
about  them  as  tapers  inflamed  with  fire  of  heaven. 

Hereof  heard  three  men  which  kept  their  wives 
mad 5 they  went  to  the  church  and  prayed  her  that 
she  would  visit  their  wives.  The  blessed  virgin, 
which  was  debonair,  went  and  visited  them  and 
delivered  them  from  the  enemy  by  unction  of  holy 
oil  and  by  prayer.  Anon  after,  it  happed  as  she 
was  in  orisons  in  a corner  in  the  church  of  S. 

Martin  that,  one  of  the  singers  was  so  sore  vexed 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


302 


* THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  with  the  enemy  that  he  ate  his  members,  which 
of  S.  went  out  of  the  chancel  and  came  straight  to  the 
Genevieve  k0iy  v;rgin.  The  blessed  virgin  commanded  the 
spirit  to  issue  out.  He  answered : If  he  issued,  he 
would  issue  by  the  eye.  She  commanded  that  he 
should  no  longer  abide  ne  dwell  there,  and  then 
he  issued  out  anon  wold  he,  nold  he,  by  the  flux 
of  the  womb,  and  left  foul  enseigns  and  tokens,  and 
the  sick  man  was  all  whole  and  in  good  mind, 
whereof  he  thanked  our  Lord.  They  of  Tours 
honoured  much  this  blessed  virgin,  how  well  it 
was  against  her  will.  On  a time  as  she  was  at  her 
door  she  saw  a maid  pass  by  bearing  a burette  of 
oil ; she  called  her  and  asked  what  she  bare,  she 
answered  and  said,  oil  which  she  had  bought. 
The  holy  maid  which  saw  the  enemy  sit  on  the 
mouth  of  the  burette,  blew  on  it,  and  the  burette 
brake ; she  blessed  the  oil  and  bade  the  maid  bear 
it  forth  safely.  The  people  that  saw  this  had 
great  marvel  that  the  enemy  could  not  hide  him, 
but  that  she  perceived  him,  and  thanked  our  Lord. 
There  was  brought  to  her  a child  by  his  friends 
which  was  dumb,  blind,  and  lame;  the  blessed 
virgin  anointed  him  with  the  holy  oil,  and  the  same 
hour  he  saw  clearly,  spake  and  went,  and  received 
health  entirely. 

In  the  territory  of  Meaux  the  holy  maid  did  do 
labour  a field  that  she  had,  and  a storm  and  tempest 
of  wind  and  rain  arose  which  troubled  much  the 
workmen.  She  lay  down  stretching  on  the  earth, 
in  orison  and  prayer,  and  our  Lord  showed  there 
a fair  miracle,  for  the  rain  fell  on  all  the  corn  in 
the  fields  thereabout,  and  in  her  field  fell  not  one 
drop.  Another  time  as  she  was  on  the  Seine 
there  was  a great  tempest,  and  she  besought  God 
of  help,  and  anon  it  ceased  in  such  wise  that  they 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


303 


that  were  present  saw  well  that  our  Lord  at  her  The  Life 
request  and  for  her  love  made  wind  and  rain  to  S.  # 
cease.  All  sick  men  that  she  anointed  with  holy  '■,enevleve 
oil  devoutly,  were  healed  and  made  whole. 

It  happed  so  that  on  a time  when  she  would 
have  anointed  a demoniac  she  found  no  oil  in  her 
ampul,  whereof  she  was  so  sorry  that  she  wist  not 
what  to  do,  for  there  was  no  bishop  present  for  to 
bless  it.  She  lay  down  in  orisons  and  prayers, 
beseeching  God  that  he  would  deliver  the  man 
from  the  enemy.  Our  Lord  showed  there  two 
fair  virtues,  for  as  soon  as  she  arose  her  ampul  was 
full  of  oil,  being  in  her  hands,  of  which  she 
anointed  the  madman,  and  anon  he  was  delivered 
of  the  wicked  spirit,  which  ampul,  with  the  oil,  saw 
the  same  man  that  wrote  her  life  eighteen  years 
after  her  decease.  Many  other  miracles  without 
number  showed  our  Lord  for  the  love  of  the  holy 
and  blessed  saint,  S.  Genevieve,  the  which  lived 
in  this  world  full  of  virtues  and  miracles  more 
than  four  score  years,  and  departed  out  of  this 
world  and  died  worthily  the  third  day  of  January, 
and  was  buried  in  the  mount  of  Paris  called  Mount 
Parlouer,  and  is  now  called  the  Mount  of  S 
Genevieve,  in  the  church  of  S.  Peter  and  Paul, 
the  which,  as  said  is  at  the  beginning,  the  King 
Louis,  sometimes  called  Clovis,  did  do  make  by 
the  exhortement  of  this  holy  virgin,  for  the  love 
of  whom  he  gave  grace  to  many  prisoners  at  her 
departing.  And  after,  there  were  many  fair 
miracles  which  by  negligence,  by  envy,  and  not 
recking,  were  not  written,  as  he  confessed  that  put 
her  life  in  Latin,  except  two  which  he  set  in  the 
end  of  his  book  as  here  folio weth.  Unto  the 
sepulchre  of  the  holy  virgin  was  brought  a young 
man  that  was  so  sick  of  the  stone  that  his  friends 

u 


VOL.  III. 


Digitized  by  xjOOQlC 


3<H 


THE  GOLDEN  LEGEND 


The  Life  had  no  hope  of  life.  In  great  weeping  and  sorrow 
of  S.  they  brought  him  thither  requiring  aid  of  the  holy 
Genevieve  yjrgjn#  Anon  after  their  prayer,  the  stone  issued, 
and  he  was  forthwith  all  whole  as  he  had  never 
been  sick.  Another  man  came  thither  that  gladly 
wrought  on  the  Sunday,  wherefor  our  Lord 
punished  him,  for  his  hands  were  so  benumbed 
and  lame  that  he  might  not  work  on  other  days. 
He  repented  him  and  confessed  his  sin,  and  came 
to  the  tomb  of  the  said  virgin,  and  there  honoured 
and  prayed  devoutly,  and  on  the  mom  he  returned 
all  whole,  praising  and  thanking  our  Lord,  that  by 
the  worthy  merits  and  prayers  of  the  holy  virgin, 
grant  and  give  us  pardon,  grace,  and  joy  perdurable. 
After  the  death  of  the  blessed  virgin  S.  Genevieve 
was  assigned  a lamp  at  her  sepulchre  in  which  the 
oil  sourded  and  sprang  like  water  in  a well  or 
rountain.  Three  fair  things  showed  our  Lord  by 
this  lamp,  for  the  fire  and  light  burned  continually, 
the  oil  lessed  not  ne  minished,  and  the  sick 
people  were  healed  there.  Thus  wrought  our 
Lord  by  the  merits  of  the  blessed  virgin  corporally, 
which  much  more  abundantly  worketh  by  her 
merits  to  the  souls  spiritually.  Many  more 
miracles  hath  our  Lord  showed  at  her  sepulchre 
which  be  not  here  written,  for  it  would  be  over 
long  to  remember  them  all,  and  yet  daily  be 
showed,  wherefore  in  every  necessity  and  need  let 
us  call  on  this  glorious  saint,  the  blessed  Genevieve, 
that  she  be  mediatrix  unto  God  for  us  wretched 
sinners,  that  we  may  so  live  and  amend  us  in  this 
present  life  that  we  may  come  when  we  shall 
depart  hence  by  her  merits  unto  the  life  perdurable 
in  heaven.  Amen. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GLOSSARY 


achauffed,  pp.,  angry. 
ampul , n.,  a vessel  for  holy 
oil. 

ancelles,  handmaids. 
appertly,  adv.,  openly. 
asprely , adv.,  extremely. 
avaled,  v.,  descended. 
avoir,  n.,  goods. 
await,  n.,  a snare. 
axes,  n .,  ague. 

barat,  n.,  treachery. 
besoins,  n.  (Fr.),  needs. 
bourdon,  n.,  a staff. 
brockets,  n.,  spikes. 
bubale,  n. , a wild  ox. 
bucale,  n.,  shambles. 
burette,  n.,  cruse  or  bottle  for 
oil. 

bydwong,  v.,  to  refrain  or 
keep  strictly. 

cellarer,  n.,  steward. 
champaine , n.,  campagna. 
cherety,  n.,  affection. 
clarte,  adj.,  glory. 
con,  v, , to  be  able. 

deal,  v. , to  divide. 
deduit,  n,,  pleasure. 
did  do  make*=  caused  to  be 
made. 

doubt,  v.,  to  fear. 
eme,  n.,  uncle. 

empesh,  v.,  Fr.  emphher,  to 
hinder. 

engine,  n. , wit. 


enseigned,  v.,  Fr.  enseigner, 
taught. 

faits , n,,  doings. 
fiom,  n.,  river. 
foumil,  n.,  limekiln. 
f rushed,  pf.,  bruised  ; Fr. 
froisser,  to  crush. 

gree,  n.,  goodwill. 
guerished,  pp.,  Fr.  guerir, 
healed. 

heled,  v.,  concealed. 
honeysuckle,  n.,  a rendering 
of  locusta  as  the  name  of 
a plant. 

hosteler,  n.,  one  who  received 
guests. 

impetre , v.,  to  beseech. 

japed,  v,,  mocked. 
jowes,  n.,  Fr.joues,  cheeks. 

lessed,pp.,  diminished. 

mat,  adj.,  worn  out. 
mechant,  adj.,  Fr.  michant, 
wicked. 

more,  adj.,  elder. 
moyen,  n.,  mediator. 
muddes , n.,  Fr.  minds % a 
measure  of  about  five 
quarters. 

occision,  n.,  slaughter. 
orage,  n.  (Fr.),  a storm. 

805 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


3o6  the  golden  legend 


parements , n.,  adornments. 

quarrels , n. , crossbow  bolts. 

ratted,  pp. , torn. 
raught,  v.,  reached. 
renomee,  n. , renown. 
repeased,  v.,  reassured. 

sacred,  v.,  consecrated. 
slewed,  v. , followed. 


soler,  n.,  an  upper  chamber. 
styed,  v.,  ascended. 

fatche , it. , Fr.  tache,  a stain. 
tigurion,  n.,  a cottage,  used 
also  for  a shrine  or  chapel. 
transumeth,  v.,  converteth. 

unite  the,  adv.,  scarcely. 

wood,  adj.,  mad. 


END  OF  VOL.  Ill 


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty 
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press 


Digitized  by  vjOOQlC 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


h 


Digitized  by  Google 


DO  NOT  REMOVE 
OR 

MliTHATF  fAcn 


Digitized  by  ^.ooQle 


